

4 ^ 








The Secret of Tantric MysHdsm 




I 




































The Paratrisika (or Paratrlmsika) is a 
short Tantra which has been held 
in the highest esteem by Kashmir 
Saivism or Trika. After Somananda, 
Abhinavagupta has written two 
commentaries on it, a short one 
'{Laghuvrtti) and an extensive one— 
the present Vivarana which is 
presented here for the firs^t time in 
sn English translation. The Pardtiisikd 
Vivarana is one of the most fascinating 
but also most difficult texts of the 
Kashmir Saiva School, and of the 
mystical philosophical literature of 
India as a whole. It deals with Ultimate 
Reality {anuttara or para) and with 
the methods of realization, centred 
above all in the theory ^d practice 
of the mantra. Abhinavagupta displays 
ere his great exegetical genius and 


presents a penetrating metaphysics 
ot language, of the Word {vdk) and 
Its various stages in relation to 
consciousness. His language reflects 
m a luminous fashion the mystical 
experience contained in this text. 

r®* translation of 

Abhmavagupta-s nfasterpiece trill not 
only be a milestone in the study of 
Kashmir Saivism, but it also makes 
available one of tb^ 

texts of the Indian tradition toTJIdS! 
interested in philosophy and spirituality. 


PARA-TRISIKA-VIVARANA 


4i 




4 a 


ct ♦ * ^ 

n 




f f-4 


The Paratrisika (or Paratrlmsika) is a 
short Tantra which has been held 
in the highest esteem by Kashmir 
Saivism or Trika. After Somananda, 
Abhinavagupta has written two 
commentaries on it, a short one 

(Laghuvrtti) and an extensive one_ 

the present^Vivarana which is 
presented here for the first time in 
^ English translation. TheParatmikd 
Vivaranah one of the most fascinating 
ut also most difficult texts of the 
hmir Saiva School, and of the 
mystical philosophical literature of 
n la as a whole. It deals with Ultimate 
e ity [anuttara or para) and with 

ahn realization, centred 

f all in the theory and practice 
of the Abhinavagupta displays 

of?„c! metaphysics 

0 ^age. of the Word (vat) 

els ^oiation to 

consetousness. His language reflects 
uminous fashion the mystical 

etpen^nce contained in this teT 

only be " ""^^^T^mce will not 

^hmir Saivi^m'^'b 

available one of the 

texts of the TnH- ^ ^ mystical 

“terested i’ 

dtnphUosophyandspirituaaiy. 


para-trisikA-vivarana 



ABHINAVAGUPTA 

Para-trisika-Vivarana 

The Secret of Tantric Mysticism 


Kiiglisli tmnsUaiun with notes and 
running exposition by 

Jaideva Singh 


Sans Jail text corrected, notes on 
technical points and charts dictated by 

SWAMI Lakshmanjee 


Edited by 

BettiNA Baumer 


MOTILAL B ANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS 
PRIVATE LIMITED • DELHI 


Reprint: Delhi. 1996, 2000, 2002, 2005, 2007, 2011 
First Edition: Delhi, 1998 


© MOTILAL BANARSIDASS PUBLISHERS PRIVATE LIMITED 
All rights reserved 


ISBN: 978-81-208-0462-3 (Cloth) 
ISBN: 978-81-208-0472-2 (Paper) 


MOTILAL BANARSIDASS 

41 U.A. Bungalow Road, Jawahar Nagar, Delhi 110 007 
8 Mahalaxmi Chamber, 22 Bhulabhai Desai Road, Mumbai 400 026 
203 Royapettah High Road, Mylapore, Chennai 600 004 
236, 9th Main III Block, Jayanagar, Bangalore 560 011 
Sanas Plaza, 1302 Baji ^o Road, Pune 411 002 
8 Camac Street, Kolkata 700 017 
Ashok Rajpath, Patna 800 004 
Chowk, Varanasi 221 001 


Printed in India 


Byjainendra Prakash Jain at Shri Jainendra Press, 
A-45 Naraina, Phase-I, New Delhi 110 028 
and Published by Narendra Prakash Jain for 
Motilal Banarsidass Publishers Private Limited, 
Bung^ow Road, Delhi 110 007 



33b 




' 7 



CONTENTS 


Preface by Bettina Baumer 
List of Abbreviations 

Part I : Paratrisika-Vivarana of Abhinavagupta: 
Translation with Notes 
Preliminaries (Benedictory Verses 1-5) 
Verse 1 of ParMrisika 
Commentary 

Different implications of the word Devi 
The rationale of the past tense in ‘said’ 
(uvaca) 

The Final Resting Place of all questions 
and answers 

Sixteen interpretations of anuttara 
Interpretation of kaulika-siddhidam 
Exposition on Verse 1 and Commentary 
Etadguhyarft mahaguhyarTi...Tcxt and 
Commentary 

Verse 2 

Commentary 
Verses 3 and 4 
Commentary 
Verses 5 to 9a 
Commentary 
Verses 9 to 18b 
Commentary 
Verse 19 

Commentary 
Verse 20 

Commentary 
Verse 21 

Commentary 


Page 

xi 

xxi 


1 

5 

7 

10 

11 

14 

20 

31 

47 

53 

61 

61 

65 

65 

87 

89 

202 

204 

236 

236 

239 

239 

240 
240 




viii 


Para- Triiikd'- Vivarana 


Verse 22 

Commentary 
Verse 23 

Commentary 
Verse 24 

Commentary 
Verses 25 to 26 
Commentary 
Verse 27 
Verse 28 
Verse 29 
Verse 30 
Verses 31 to 33 
Commentary 
Verse 34 
Verse 35 

Commentary 
Verse 36 
Commentary 
Verse 37 
Commentary 

Autobiographical Verses of Abhinavagupta 
General Index 


241 

241 

242 

243 
243 
243 

243 

244 

245 
248 

248 

249 

250 

251 
259 
262 
262 
268 
268 
269 

269 

270 
273 


Part II : Paratrisika-Vivarana : Sanskrit Text 
Index of Half- Verses of Paratrisika 
Index of Quotations 


%o\3 

Uo 


List of Charts 

I. The various an 4a or ellipses contained in anuttara 

2A. The identity of the original source (.bitnba) and 
Us reflection {pratibimba) 

2B. The transposition of the tattvas (categories of 
existence) in reflection (pratibimba) 

3. The arrangement of letters according to Matrka 
in parasatfivitti in sarvdgrarupatS 







Pard-TriSikd-Vivarana 


IX 


4. Arrangement of letters according to Matrka in 

pardparasamvitti in sarvamadhyarupatd ... ... 133 

5. Letters of Malini together with their representa¬ 

tion with reference to supreme consciousness or 
parasamvitti ... ... ... 138 

6. Parasamvitti (supreme consciousness) — sarvdgrarupatd 143 

7. In supreme-cum-non-supreme 

consciousness, sarvamadhyarupatd in the order of 
Matrka-letters ... ... ... 145 

8. Arrangement of letters according to Matrka in 

pardparasarpv itti sarvdntya-rupata ... ... 146 

9. Malini in apara sarnvitti and Matrka in pa§yantl or 

pardpara sarjtvitti ... ... ... 147 

10. The outline of the Mandala of the trident and 

lotuses {triiuldbjaman4ala) ... ... 237 



PREFACE 


The last six years of Thakur Jaideva Singh’s life were devoted 
to the study of the Paratrisika Vivarana of Abhinavagupta with 
that full concentration of which he was still capable at the ripe 
age of 93. He did not have the satisfaction of seeing the fruit of 
his labours in pubUshed form. After a short but severe iUness he 

passed away on 27th May 1986. 

Jaideva Singh spent two summers in Kashmir (1980-81) to 
study this difficult text at the feet of his Guru Swami Lakshm^jee, 
the only living representative of the full Kashmir Saiva 
tradition both in its theory and practice, iastra &nAyoga. Without 
his understanding of the tradition and illuminating exposition, 
this text would have remained obscure. Swamiji has corrected 
the Sanskrit text published by the Kashmir Series (KSTS), which 
contained many mistakes, basing his emendations both on the 
available manuscript material and on the tradition. He has ako 
devised the charts illustrating the text. After completing the 
translation, Jaideva Singh spent two pars preparing a lengthy 
introduction. He read many Sanskrit texts and other works 
of philosophy and mysticism, but unfortunately he did not leave 
behind any notes for the planned introduction, which he had not 
committed to paper before his illness. The day before he was 
admitted to hospital, he said to me, as if it were his final testa¬ 
ment: “Kashmir Saivism is the culmination of Indian thou^t 
and spirituality.” In a sense, this text led him to his own ffiffil- 
ment, which may be expressed in the words of the Paratrisika : 
anuttara, Ultimate Reality, or khecari-samata, identification with 
the universal Consciousness. 

After his death the task of editing the book was entrusted to 
me. Pandit H.N. Chakravarty helped in revising the text and 
translation, for which we would like to express our gratitude. The 
author’s translation, which was partly handwritten and 
evidenced many corrections, had to be edited and retyped. With 
the exception of a very few corrections, his translation has pen 
left unchanged. It should perhaps be mentioned that sometimes 



Xll 


P cird~ Trisikd- Vivarana 

s‘S„7m'‘T“k "'““W "O' bo ""■ior- 

andable. has been inserted in the translation. Except at a few 

nl “te'TiT b b ''T "ddibons. 

In th S 7 ia ? 'O oh""*' ‘he style of the translator. 

the art of, 7 J""*''" b‘"gh has shown his fuli mastery of 

the art „f translation, which means more than a literal corres- 

lannua"e' Ind of the great difficulties of both 

langnap and content, he has succeeded in bringing out the 

Sa^Sge 'houSht and thf beauty of 

lat™“7“t™ ®*"*h 'h' '“O other trans- 

Which he saw o' P“bhshed ; One in Hindi by Nilkanth Gurtoot 

by R. Gnoht Whi7he°had'n7'”“ 

3i"C' he received it rn^f'^rairad'yT”' 

autho^s''?nTroducttTthat “ 

writing- It ic gami • " ^ ^ prevented by illness from 

in its proner r t as a help towards situating the book 

tents tenfnt- '''^^hout claiming to be a study of its con- 

the deenta e such a study would be.® This is one of 

in eenerai* ^ost difficult texts of Kashmir Saivism or Trika 
translationTan°bet'"^'”^r^''*’*''particular, and the present 
not only in the fieirV^^ 

mysticism as well. ° Kashmir Saivism, but of comparative 


-LHE lEXT 

condem'Id'Trntric text-^ commentaries on this short and 
tary) and also called A Laghuvrtti (Short Commen- 

UltimateReahty” ^7/'^ (“Reflection on the 

he also calls Tattvaviveka or f.Zr' Vivarana, which 

his Tantraloka (IX 313 wkl J T AmUtaraprakriya in 

P^^^^^^^^kavivaranadan ityarthah, Vol. VI, p. 249) « Since 

writ eTifl^r'^” "■' Abhinavagrpta mus.tye 

tten before his magnum opus. The two commentaries differ 

text °which c \ interpretation. The commentated 

bfa J onsists of only 36 verses and which is supposed to 

par , or in eed the essence oiRudraydmala {Tantray is gener- 


Preface 


Xlll 


ally known as ParatrirfiHka, “The Thirty Verses on the Supreme”. 
Abhinavagupta however rejects this title because there are ac¬ 
tually more than thirty verses, and because he prefers the title 
which indicates the meaning of the text; Paratriiika, This title, 
accepted by him, is explained as “The Supreme Goddess of the 
Three”, or more explicitly: “The Supreme Goddess who tran¬ 
scends and is identical with the Trinity (Trika).”® The “three” 
refers to the three Saktis; icchd (will), jndna (knowledge) and 
kriyd (activity), or pard, pardpard and apard, or else the three 
states of jw/i, sthiti and sarnhdra, and a fortiori to the content of 
the Trika, i.e. Siva, Sakti and nara. Another possible title, one 
given by Abhinavagupta’s predecessors, was Pardtrimiakd, which 
is explained by them as: “That which speaks out {kdyati) the 
three (tri) Saktis (/a) of the Supreme {pard)." 

The Pardtrisikd has also been called Anuttarasutra by the earlier 
teachers, “The Sutra or essence of the Unsurpassable, the Ulti¬ 
mate Reality” (p. 276, KSTS), and elsewhere Trikasiitra, which 
Jayaratha explains as: Jritrikasutra iti, trikaprameyasticikdydmiri- 
pardtriiikdydm ityarthafy (Tantraloka XII, 15, vol. VII, p. 101). 
This shows the great importance given by Kashmir Saivism to 
this revealed text as the “index to the entire subject-matter of 
Trika system.”® In fact it is one of the most authoritative and 
venerated texts, along with Mdlinivijaya Tantra (mostly called 
PurvaSdstra by Abhinava). This importance is also proved by the 
fact that Somananda wrote a commentary on the Pardtriiikd 
called Vivrti, which is unfortunately lost and to which Abhinava- 
g^pta frequently refers. Maybe some obscure passages of his 
Vivarana would become clear if we were in possession of Soma- 
nanda’s Vivfti. Other commentaries quoted by Abhinavagupta 
are also not available at present, namely those of Kalyana and 
Bhavabhuti.^® There is a later commentary by Laksmirama 
(alias Lasakaka, 18th-19th cent.)”, and others about which we 
have little knowledge. 

The Tantra is in the usual form of question and answer—a 
fact which itself becomes the subject of metaphysical reflection, 
for Abhinavagupta: Bhairava answers the questions of Devi, 
which are related to the “great secret” {etad guhyam mahd~ 
guhyatn..., v. 2—this also justifies the English subtitle). Abhinava¬ 
gupta also calls it trikaidstra-rahasya-upadeSa^^ (“The teaching of 



xiv 


Para-Trisika- Vivarana 


the secret of Trika doctrine,” p. 52, KSTS), and he makes it 
cleai that this is not a text for beginners but for advanced disci¬ 
ples or even for enlightened ones: nijasisja-vibodhaya prabuddha- 
smmanaya ca (V. 5 of his introductory verses). He thus presup¬ 
poses in his readers both knowledge of the Trika doctrines as well 
as spiritual experience. This expression of his shows precisely the 
function of such a text: to enlighten those who are still on the 
way and to remind the enlightened ones of their own e.xperience. 

Any mystical te.xt addresses itself to both types of readers 
simultaneously. 

The language of both text and commentary is very often a 
secret language, used on purpose to hide the real meaning from 
the uninitiated. Not only that, but most words, verses or passages 
a\e a ou le meaning and can be interpreted on several, levels, 
e.g. on the levels oipara, parapard and apard, or in the context of 
am lata or ^dUa updya, etc. The translation contains these 
ifferent possibilities of interpretation. It should also be men- 
lone eie that the verses in Apabhramsa have not been given 
in t e translation because their language is no longer understood 
even by Kashmiri Pandits. 


ina\ agupta s interpretation of the verses is variable in the 
^ se t let le div ells at great length on the first nine verses but 
^uc shortei commentary on the latter part of the Tantra. 
nf fh the very first verse alone covers 50 pages 

edition. In ordc. to 

i . ^ s approach we must be aware of the 

Tantr-i ° ^^d of a revealed text. Since the 

fold mean' ^ says that a Sutra contains mani- 

lolcl meanings and can ^ ^ ■ 

which does not however n!eln k-"" ^ ° 

1 u* r n ^ean in an arbitrary fashion. He thus 

shows his full mastery of exegesis, taking every word of the Tantra 
to m extreme possibilities of interpretation. The best example 

ermeneutica genius is to be found in the sixteen inter- 
pretations of the term amttara—even the number 16 is significant 
because it indicates completeness or fullness.^^^ Abhinavagupta’s 
exeptic approach consists in combining fidelity to the text with 
an incredible freshness and originality. In the Indian tradition 
there are certain commentators who distort the original text in 
order to superimpose their own view on it and others who blindly 


Preface 


XV 


follow to the letter the text in question. Abhinavagupta’s genius 
is to infuse life into each syllable of the text. 

The Background 

The Divine Consciousness is identical with the Supreme Word 
{para vak), and hence every letter or word is derived from and 
ultimately inseparable from this Consciousness. “She (the 
supreme vak) is, in the most initial stage, stationed in the Divine 
I-consciousness which is the highest mantra and which is not 
limited by space and time.”(p. 3-4 KSTS). Therefore the ana¬ 
lysis of language is inseparable from that of consciousness. Mantra 
and the whole metaphysics of the Word is at the centre of this 
text. Modern philosophy of language could learn a lot from 
Abhinavagupta’s subtle speculation on the Word, vak {logos), 
which extends from its mystical dimension to the intricacies of 
Sanskrit grammar and linguistic speculation, from psychological 
subtleties to philosophical reasoning. Abhinavagupta is a master 
in all these fields and he has not left any aspect of the word. 
Because of the multiple dimensions of meaning contained in 
letters and words etc., language as a whole has been understood 
as a complete symbolical system. The Word is the symbol. The 
four stages of vak as para, paiyanti, madhyama and vaikhari represent 
a gradual descent (or ascent) from the undifferentiated, transcen¬ 
dental level to the differentiated, gross level. 

The Sanskrit language, of course, lends itself with particular 
clarity to the type of mystical-philosophical speculation on letters, 
words and sentences of which Abhinavagupta is so fond. For 
example, the very word aham, T’, as the centre of consciousness, has 
been analysed as: a standing for Siva and ha for Sakti. Aham is “the 
natural, inmXe mantra known as the Supreme Word {para vak) of 
the Light of Consciousness (prakdSasya,i.c. Siva).” (p. 55, KSTS). 
In a kind of pun it is turned around into ma-ha-a to show the 
return movement from external manifestation, represented by 
ma (standing for nara, the individual), through ha (standing for 
Sakti) to a (standing for Siva or anuttara). Thus the two move¬ 
ments of expansion and retraction of consciousness are contained 
in the two mantras aham and ma-ha-a. The very first letter of the 
alphabet, a, indeed stands for Siva or anuttara as the source of 
the whole manifestation: the external creation, the development 



XVI 


Pard-TriHkd- Vivarana 


of language (the alphabet) and the revelation of consciousness. 
Then follows the symbolical identification of the vowels with 
qualities or Saktis, e.g. d stands for dnanda (bliss), i for icchd (will), 
i for Hand (lordship), u for unme$a (unfolding), etc. Another 
important symbolical understanding of the letters is that the 
vowels are called hija (seed) and are identified with Siva, while 
the consonants yoni (womb) and are identified with Sakti. 
This implies the inseparability of Siva and Sakti, of vowels and 
consonants in language. 

A great part of the reflection on the meaning of letters is cen¬ 
tred around the two ways of arranging the letters of the Sanskrit 
alphabet, Mdtrkd and Mdlini, In the words of Jaideva Singh: 

Trika philosophy maintains that the entire manifestation is an 
expression o?pard sakti or pard vdk or transcendental logos. This 
pard vdk is creative energy. Every letter of the alphabet represents 
energy in some form. The letters of the alphabet are arranged 
in two schemes in Trika, viz. Mdtrkd and Mdlinu Mdtrkd means 
the httle mother or phonematic creative energy. Mdlini literally 
means the De\d who wears a mdld or garland of fifty letters of the 

Samknt alphabet.The main difference between Mdtfkd and 

Malim consists in the arrangement of letters. In Mdtfkd, they 
are arranged in a regular order, i.e. the vowels come first and 
the consonants come next in a serial order. In Mdlhii, they are 
arrai^e m an irregular way, i.e. the vowels and consonants are 
mixed and no serial order is observed.” 

Another aspect of the niystical-philosophical meaning of lang¬ 
uage can be seen in the following example. The simple fact that 

airava in ^ ^ ^st person addresses Devi in the second person 
ecomes or mavagupta the starting-point for a deep philo- 
sop ica re ection on the nature of the three grammatical per- 
^ns and their pronouns: I, you, he (she, it) {aham, tvam, sah). 

ese t ree are a part of the triadic structure of reality {sarvam 
tnkarupam eva, p. 73, KSTS), and they are related to the trinity 
oinara (he or it), Sakti (you) and Siva (I), and thus to the three 
levels oiapara, parapara and para (the lowest or objective, the 
intermediate and the transcendent levels). But since the trinity 
does not consist of closed entities but of a relationship where one 
can be transformed into the other, and the lower can be assumed 
in the higher, all kinds of interactions between the three persons 




Preface 


xvu 


are possible. For example the third person, which may even be 
a lifeless object, if it is addressed personally becomes a ‘you’ for 
the one who addresses it and thus shares in the Sakti-nature of 
the second person. The example given is the vocative: “You, O 
mountains!” But the same object in the third person can even 
be transformed into the first person, into an ‘I’, as in the words 
of K.]:sna in the Bhagavad Gita: “Of mountains, I am Meru. 
On the other hand, a person or ‘I’ addressing another person or 
‘you’ experiences a kind of fusion of his ‘I’ with the ‘I’ of the 
person addressed, that (common) I-feeling being of the nature 
of delight (camatkdra) and freedom {svdtantiya). Communication 
is communion in the same ahambkdva. The pure, unlimited, 
absolute ‘I’ is only Siva who is self-luminous consciousness. “The 
notion of ‘you’ i.e. the second person, though indicative of 
separateness, is actually similar to that of‘I’. Therefore both you 
and I are described as genderless.” Abhinavagupta gives several 
examples from common speech of how the three grammatical 
persons are interrelated and merge in each other, in order to 
show that everything, even insentient objects, is ultimately 
related to the absolute I-consciousness of Siva. Even the three 
numbers of singular, dual and plural are related to the three 
principles of Trika: the singular being Siva, the dual Sakti and 
the plural nara, i.e. the level of multiplicity. The restoration of 
plurality into unity or of the objective world into Siva, is indeed 
the characteristic par excellence of release from bondage: anekam 
ekadhd krtvd ko na mucyeta bandhandt (p. 79, KSTS). 

This may suffice as an example of how Abhinavagupta is able, 
by analysing grammatical structures, to throw light on reality 
in toto, because, as he himself says, language and the rules of 
grammar reflect consciousness. This is not limited to Sanskrit 
but applies to all languages, for “there is no speech which does 
not reach the heart directly.” (p. 80, KSTS). 

Metaphysically speaking, the Paratrisika Vivarana explains 
and illustrates the Tantric principle or dictum: sarvam sarvdtma- 
kam, “everything is related to everything else.” This awareness 
of the interrelatedness and oneness of all things as an expres¬ 
sion of the freedom of the Divine, is extended to the ultimate 
degree. What it implies is not a chaotic confusion of dimensions 
of reality, but an inner relationship which follows the principle 



XVlll 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


of the reality and its reflection: bimba — pratibimba. Just as in a 
mirror right becomes left and left right, in the order of creation 
the Ultimate Reality is inversed, and in order to return to the 
Source this inversion has to be rectified. Hence the highest principle 
is related to the lowest (Siva to the earth) and so forth (see 
the charts), in other words: transcendence is in immanence and 
immanence in transcendence. This is the key to the speculative 
(in the literal sense) play with the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet 
and the tattvas or principles of reality. Therefore Abhinavagupta 
comments at length on the famous verse of the Mahabharata: 
(XII, 54, also Yoga Vasisdna): 

YASMIN SARVAM YATAH SARVAM 
yah SARVAM SARVATASCA YAH / 

YASCA SARVAMAYO NITYAM 

TASMAI SARVATMANE NAMAH // 

‘Tn whom everything is, from whom everything comes, 
who is everything and everywhere, 
who is immanent in all things, eternal, 
him, the Self of all, do I adore.” 

(my translation, different from Jaideva Singh) 

In the spiritual realm—wliich is of course inseparable from 
all else—the ideal is enunciated by the Tantra in the first verse 
as khecari-samatd: sameness with the power of consciousness. 
hliecari is the Sakti moving in the free space {kha) which is an 
image of consciousness. The soul or individual knows in reality 
only two states: khecari-vaisamya^ dissimilarity, estrangement from 
the Divine Consciousness-power or the essential nature, or 
khecari-samatd (or -sdmya^ which is a state of harmony and identity 
with the divine I-consciousncss. The first is the state oipasu^ the 
bound individual, the second is the state of a jivanmukta or of 
pati^ the Lord himself, for: KhecarUsdmya is the highest state of 
Siva both in life and liberation.” 

These are only a few hints at the content of this profound 
work fiom which the reader can draw direct inspiration. Even 
Abhinavagupta himself, after completing his commentary, says 
in all humility: ‘T have briefly concluded it according to (the 


Preface 


XIX 


teaching of) my guru and the Agama. As to what happens by 
resorting to this I-consciousness, ask your personal experience. 
I have only shown a little bit of the path. One should not rest 
contented with this much...” 

♦ * ♦ 

It has not been possible to print the Sanskrit text and trans¬ 
lation alternately, because most of the translated passages were 
too long to make such a division useful for the reader. However, 
the page numbers of the Sanskrit text printed at the end have 
been indicated before every passage of the translation, so that 
the reader can follow the text alongvvith the translation. 

Since both in the translation and in the notes every technical 
term has been explained, it was not found necessary to add a 
Glossary. The Index will be useful in tracing the explanations 
of the specific terms of Trika and of Paratrisika. 

Finally, I would like to thank Swami Lakshmanjee for all 
his guidance and inspiration, and especially for blessing this 
book by giving it a dedication praising both Abhinavagupta’s 
genius and Siva, the unsurpassable: abhinavacamatkdrdtmane 
Hvdya namah\ 

Varanasi Bettina Baumer 

27th May 1987 
and 

Vasant Navaratra 1988 


Notes 

1. Nilkantha Gurtoo, Sri Paratrimsika. Delhi (Motilal Banarsi- 
dass), 1985. 

2. Raniero Gnoli, Paratrimsika tattvavivaranam. H commento 
di Abhinavagupta alia Paratrimsika, Roma (Seric Orientale 
Roma), 1985. 

3. The reader may consult the introduction by R. Gnoli, or 
in Hindi by N. Gurtoo. 

4. We need not go here into the life and works of Abhinava¬ 
gupta. Apart from the well-known study by K.C. Pandey, 
we may refer to two recent publications: V. Raghavan, 



XX 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


Abhinavagupta and His Works, Varanasi (Chaukhambha 
Orientalia), 1980, and N. Rastogi, Introduction to the 
Tantraloka, Delhi (Motilal Banarsidass), 1987. 

5. This commentary has been translated into Italian by 
R. Gnoli (Commento Breve alia Trentina della Suprema, 
Torino, Boringhieri, 1965), and into French by A. Padoux 
(La Paratrisikalaghuvrtti de Abhinavagupta, Paris, Publ. 
de ITnstitut de Civilisation Indienne, De Boccard, 1975). 

6. Cf. N. Rastogi, op.cit., pp. 55 ff. 

7. Cf. T. Goudriaan and S. Gupta, Hindu Tantric and Sakta 
Literature, Wiesbaden (O. Harrassowitz), 1981, pp. 40 and 
47. The Vijhana Bhairava, among other texts, is also attached 
to the Rudrayamala. 

8. The form Paratrisika is also used by Ksemaraja and 
Jayaratha whenever they quote this text. 

9. N. Rastogi, op.cit., p. 56. 

10. Even their identity is not certain. Cf. Tantraloka XIII, 149. 

11. Published in the KSTS, vol. 69 (1947). 

12. Cf. in another context the so^aiakaldtmaka soma, p. 274, 
KSTS, etc. 


ABBREVIATIONS 


A.a 

A.P.S. 

Bh.G. 

I.P.K. 

KSTS 

L. V. 

M. V.T. 
P.K. 
P.T. 
P.T.V. 

S. D. 
Sp.K. 
Sv.T. 

U. 

V. Bh. 
Y.S. 

?T. 

f. sr. 

T. 

*ft. 
^r. «iT. 

T. 

JT. 

fW. %{. 

sr. 

c 

?rr. 

?f. 


Abhinavagupta 
Ajadapramatrsiddhi (Utpala) 

Bhagavad Gita 

Isvarapratyabhijfia Karika (Utpala) 

Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies 
Laghu Vrtti (on Paratrisika) 

Malinivijaya Tantra (also Malinivijayottara) 
Pratyabhijfia Karika (same as I.P.K.) 

Paratrisika 
Paratrisika Vivarana 
Sivadfsti 
Spanda Karika 
Svacchanda Tantra 
Upani§ad 
Vijnana Bhairava 

Yoga Sutra (also P.Y.S. for Patafijali Yoga Sutra) 

Hr 

sTcqrfVramftspr 

^Tfnrrer 

JT^nrnsjr 

trrf^ 

Orcf^fe 

^ f^^nrfoi 



. r 

I 


PRELIMINARIES 


(Parentage of Abhinavagupta and a desire for spiritual well¬ 
being. ) 


Vimalakalasrayabhinavasrstimaha janani 
Bharitatanusca paficamukhaguptarucirjanakah. 
Tadubhayayamalasphuritabhavavisargamayam 
Hfdayam anuttaramrtakulam mama samsphuratat. (1) 

Translation 

(There is double entendre in this verse) 

First Interpretation 

May my heart^ (i.e., the reality which is designated as jagad- 
dnanda, the divine beatitude made visible in the form of the um- 
verse), whose very nature is manifestation* bursting into view by 
the union® of both, viz., Siva and Sakti {tadubhayayamala-sphurita- 
bhajoa-visargamayarn), which is the very emblem of supreme 
immortality be fully flourished {sarrisphuratat). 

Ubhayam or ‘both’ refers to janani or mother and janaka or 
father. The janani or mother is the iSakti, the universal Divine 
Energy which expresses its stamina in ever fresh creativity that 
is inspired by pure, absolute autonomy® {pimalakcdaSrayabhinava- 
sfsfimaha) —the father is Siva who is perfect and complete in Him¬ 
self not lacking anything whatsoever {bharitatanuh) and whose 
zest in creativity is brought to realization by five powers® .{panca- 
mukhaguptaruciht). 

Notes 

1. Hfdaya or heart here refers to jagadananda, the divine beati¬ 
tude which is immutable, which never declines, which is visible 
in the form of the universe, which is the very core of manifestation. 
Cf. Tantraloka I, 1 with Jayaratha’s Commentary. 

2. Jayaratha explains visarga as bahirullilasi^&svabkdva^, i.e. it 
is the very nature of the Divine to manifest Himself externally. 



2 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


3. Union or ydmala denotes the sdmarasya or perfectly unified 
or undifferentiated state of Siva and Sakti which is the pair and 
origin of all differentiation. 

4. The word kald in this context means, as Jayaratha puts it, 
Svdtantrya-iakti i.e. absolute autonomy. 

5. ‘Five powers’ refers to the main powers of the Divine, viz. 
cit (consciousness), dnanda (bhss, beatitude), icchd (will), jfidna 
(knowledge) and kriyd (activity). 

Vimala or pure in the text means ‘not having any of the dnava, 
mdyiya and kdrma malas\ 


Second Interpretation of the Verse 
May my heart^ which is full of the supreme quintessence of 
reahty {anuttardmrtakulam), and which is the product of the exu¬ 
berance of emotion due to the mating of both (i.e. my father and 
mother) {tadubhayaydmalasphurita-bhdvavisargamayam) expand in 
supreme consciousness. 


The mother (janani) is one whose name is constituted by the 
etters {kala), vi, ma, la (literally whose name rests on the letters 
m, ma, la, vimalakaldsrayd) and whose delight consisted in giving 
birth to Abhinavagupta {abhinavasrsiimahd). The father is one 
whose glory is known by the appellation Simhagupta {panca- 
mu aguptaruahy and who is complete in himself {bharitatanuiy). 


Notes 


^ heart in 6aivagama refers to that centre or 

ya dma Tora which all the five sensory activities or jndnen- 

procee and to which they return. In yogic parlance, it is 
known as susumnd. / & i' » 

Q' ~ Abhinayagupta’s mother was Vimala. 

anca mis derived from the root‘pane’ (I.P.A. 
pancatt, pancate) which means ‘to spread out’. Pancamukha, there- 
lore means one whose mouth is wide open’ i.e. ‘siniha^ (lion). 
Simhagupta is a short form of Narasimhagupta which was the 
name oi Abhinavagupta’s father. 


4 He IS said to be ‘bkaritatanu’ or complete in himself, because 
he had samdvesa Or compenetration in Siva-Sakti. 


Jayaratha in his commentary on Tantraloka, vol. I, 1st verse 
says that Abhinavagupta was ^yoginibhujy (one born of Yogini) 


Abhinavagupta 


3 


for himself. Toginibhuh is one whose father is a ^siddha^ (a perfect 
one in yoga) and whose mother is yoginU One born of the union 
of siddha 3,nd yogini is known as yoginibhuh. 

Second and third verses are expressive of homage to the Devi 
(goddess). 


Second Verse 

Yasyam antarvisvam etad vibhati 
Bahyabhasam bhasamanam visrstau 
Ksobhe kslne’ nuttarayam sthitau tarn 
Vande devim svatmasamvittim ekam. (2) 

Translation 

I bow to that one goddess in the form of Self-consciousness^ in 
whom this universe which appears as an external objective exis¬ 
tence in the state of manifestation, shines {vibhati)^ on the extinc¬ 
tion of that delusive understanding^ which makes one identify 
oneself with one’s vehicles, inwardly {antar) in the state of 
Supreme Reality^ {anuttaraydrri sthitau). 

Notes 

1. ^SvdtmasarjfivittV means the consciousness of the Real Self, 
not of that psycho-somatic state which masquerades as the Self. 

2. Ksobha^ literally ‘agitation’ means here that disturbing delu¬ 
sive understanding which uproots us from our real mooring and 
makes us identify ourselves with our vehicles, and thus shows the 
universe as external to the Divine Consciousness. 

3. Anuttara or Supreme Reality is that state in which the 
external objective existence is felt as only an expression of the 
Self or Divine Consciousness. External has a meaning only with 
reference to the empirical consciousness identified with its 
vehicles, not to the Divine Consciousness. The external world is 
like a reflection in the mirror of consciousness which, though not 
different from the mirror, appears as different from it. 

Third Verse 

Narasaktisivatmakam trikam 
Hfdaye ya vinidhaya bhasayet 
Pranamami param anuttaram 
Nijabhasam pratibhacamatkrtim. (3) 



4 


Pard-Trisikd’- Vivarana 


Translation 

I ofTer my homage to the wondrous delight of that consciousness 
which is supreme [pardm) and unsurpassable, which is effulgent 
by its own light, which while ha\dng within itself the group of 
the three, viz. phenomenal reality [nara), the Universal Spiritual 
Energy [^akti), and Siva makes them appear externally. 

Fourth Verse 

(Homage to the Guru or spiritual guide) 

Jayatyanarghamahima vipasitapasuvrajah 
Siimanadyaguruh Sambhuh iSrikanthah paramesvarah. (4) 

Translation 

Hail to the primordial Guru Sambhu,i Srikantha^ the great lord 
who is full of radiance (spiritual Ught), whose greatness is beyond 
all evaluation, and who cuts asunder the bondage of the group of 
bound souls. 


Notes 

1. Sambhu-Siva who as Srikantha was moved with pity for 
suffering humanity and inspired Durvasas to spread the message 
o aivagama. Therefore, he is the primordial Guru of this 

asto. ambhunatha was the name of Abhinavagupta’s guru in 

n a and Kaula Sastra. Therefore there appears to be a double 

f”/? re in t e word Sambhu. In that case, adya guru would mean 
imtial guru, * 

2. Srikantha- This is one of the names of Siva. It is said that 
he was touched by pity for suffering humanity. He, therefore, 
commissioned the sage Durvasas to revive the teacliing of Saiva- 
gama. e sage ivided the teaching of Saivagama into three 
classes: admita (non-dualistic), dvaita (dualistic) and dvaitadvaita 
(non-duahstic cum dualistic) and taught them to Tryambaka, 

mar a a, an . rinatha, respectively. Tryambaka was the 
founder of the Advaita School to wlrich Abhinavagupta belongs. 


Fifth Verse 

(The purpose of Abhinavagupta’s Commentary) 


Abhinavagupia 


5 


Nijasisyavibodhaya prabuddhasmaranaya ca 
Mayabhinavaguptena sramo’yam kriyate manak. (5) 

Translation 

For the clear understanding of my pupils and for refreshing the 
memory of those who are already proficient in this S^tra (this 
philosophical discipline) I, Abhinavagupta, am making a little 
exertion (in writing this commentary). 

THE TEXT WITH THE COMMENTARY 
Sri Dev! uvaca 

ANUTTARAM KATHAM DEVA 
SADYAH ELAULIKASIDDHIDAM 
YENA VIJRATAMATRENA 
KHECARI-SAMATAM VRAJET (1) 

Meaning of Important Words 

Anuttaram : the Supreme, the unsurpassable, the Absolute Con¬ 
sciousness; sadyah: immediately, spontaneously, kaulika: pertain¬ 
ing to kula or the supreme energy of Siva appearing in the entire 
cosmos. Consisting of the body, senses, worlds etc. also means 
ghanatdf i.e. solidification, concretization (of consciousness); 
siddhi: accomplishment, perfection of achievement; fulfilment of 
aim; spiritual power. Kauliki siddhi therefore means the achieve¬ 
ment of identity of the individual consciousness, of the empirical 
I with the perfect I-consciousness of Siva which has become 
concretized in the form of the cosmos, an achievement which 
comes about in this very physical body. 

Khecan^^bodhabhumisahcdrini sail iyarri sarmitiakiihi^N p. 11 )> 
the Consciousness-power moving about in the sphere of universal 
knowledge. Khecari: ^khe carati iti khecari^ means literally that 
which moves about in kha or sky. Kha or sky is the symbol of 
the unobstructed expanse of Consciousness. Here according to 
Abhinavagupta, it means Sarnvid-iakti or consciousness-power. 

Translation 

The exalted goddess said (to Bhairava): “O God, how^ does the 
unsurpgissable divine Consciousness^ bring about immediately® 



6 


Pard-TriHkd- Vivarana 


the achievement of the identity of the empirical I with the perfect 
I-consciousness of Siva which comes about in this very physical 
body^ and by the mere knowledge of which one acquires same¬ 
ness with the Universal Consciousness-power {khecari)V^ 


Notes 


The Devi is the pardMH who on the plane oipaiyanti and madhyama 
puts a question as the Devi in order to bestow grace on human 
beings, and on the other hand being poised in anuttara answers 
as Bhairava. 

1* Pathd'ni» Plow i.e. kcno, pvdkdTcnci^ —-in what way^ by what 
means. 


2. Anuttdrdm: the unsurpassable Divine Consciousness is so 
called, because, as Abhinavagupta puts it, it is the Experient of 
aU, and there is none other that can make it his object of experi¬ 
ence. It is the universal subject par excellence. ’■^Tasya tu cidat- 
manah svaprakdiasya na grdhakdntaram asti iti anuttaratvam" (L. V. 
p* 1). Anuttara is so called, because there is none other who can 
act as subject of that Self-luminous Universal Consciousness.” 
It IS the Eternal Universal Subject of all experience. 

3. Sadyah-. Immediately i.e. at the very moment when it is 

« Laghvi Vrtti, Abhinavagupta adopts the reading 

^ata_ m place oi sadyah. Svatah has been explained in Laghvi 
Vrtti as svatantrataK i.e., by its absolute autonomy. 

4. Kaulika-siddhih: means ‘kule dehe bhavd kauliki siddhW, i.e. 
an acluevement that occurs, that is experienced in this very phy¬ 
sical body There are two important words in this phrase, viz. 
kauhka and stddhi. Kaulika is the adjective from kula, happening 
or occurring m kula-, siddhi means achievement, the desired 
u Iment. What is this achievement, what is this fulfilment? 

• u ^vement is cidaikdtmya' i.e. identity with, unification 
wt or universal Consciousness. Kula includes deha or physical 
body. So, ‘kaulika-dddhV means the achievement of the unifica- 
ion o the empirical consciousness with the Divine Universal 
Consdousness in this very body. Thehmitation of the individual 
consciousness disappears, it is transformed into unity-conscious¬ 
ness, and the individual views the world and life in a different 
ght. Kula on the macrocosmic plane, is the divine creative 
energy, the para vdk which brings about the phonematic emana- 


Abhinavagupta 


7 


tion up to ^ha\ the manifestation of the universe. On the micro- 
cosmic plane, it refers to that energy which works in the human 
body. Kaulika siddhi thus brings about the perfect harmony of 
the microcosmic with the macrocosmic. 

There are, however, many shades of meaning of kaulika siddhi 
which will be clear from the translation of the Vivarana com¬ 
mentary of Abhinavagupta. 

5. Khecari-samatd. 

Khecari: A.G. in L.V. says, 'khecari bodhabhumisahcarini sail iyarp, 
sarpmc-chaktih.^ (p. 2). ^KhecarV is the Consciousness-power that 
moves about on the plane of bodha or the universal Divine Con¬ 
sciousness. What are the characteristics of this bodha? A.G. says, 
‘They are avikalpatvam^ purnatoarp. Bodha or the Universal Divine 
Consciousness is (1) thought-free {avikalpa) and (2) it is puma 
i.e., whole, complete, undivided, unconditioned, integral. In one 
word, it is not limited or determined by any external condition. 
Khecari^ therefore, is the iakti that pertains to this plane of 
consciousness. 

Samatd means ‘sameness’. So ^khecan-samatdrp vrajeV means he 
acquires the same integral, unconditioned, undetermined con¬ 
sciousness as that of Siva or the Divine. 

One who does not rise to that level does not have the experi¬ 
ence of khecari. As A.G. puts it in L.V., ^^Tatprakdrdparijndne tu na 
khecari abodharupe vedydrpie sancarandf^ (L-V., p. 2), “one who 
does not have the experience of that level does not have the 
experience of khecari^ because his consciousness moves about in 
abodha which is only objective-external like blue colour or jar 
or cloth or internal like pleasure, pain, etc.” Abodha in this con¬ 
text is a technical term meaning empirical consciousness. A.G. 
clarifies this idea further by saying: “Th/a eva vedyaih nilddibhimi^ 
yantriteti na purna^aktiK^ (L. V. 2). Since the empirical consciousness 
is determined, conditioned by ‘blue’, etc., therefore it is not purna^ 
not integral, not unconditioned. The consciousness of the khecari 
level alone is unconditioned and hence purna or whole in itself. 

Commentary 

Text 

Yxovciparameivarah on p. 2 upto devl ityucyate on p. 3,1. 5 



8 


Pard-Trisikd-Vivarana 


Translation 


The Highest Lord ever brings about the five-fold act.^ He is in 
fact the very Grace itself, being always equipped with His 
Supreme Divine Energy (Sakti) \vhose very nature is Grace (it 
should be borne in mind that Sakti never considers herself as 
(Efferent from Siva.^) (The Supreme Divine Energy or pard 
Sakti expresses itself in pard vdk). This Sakti which is full of the 
thought of Grace for the entire world is, to begin with, non- 
different (in the undifferentiated or niroikalpa state) from paSyantl 
who is pardmar^amayi i.e. who is always cognizant of the essential 
nature of the Divine and who has a hundred powers which are 

boimdless in operation which however will be described later. She 

(the Supreme vdk) is, in the most initial stage, stationed in the 
Divine I-consciousness which is the highest mantra and which 
IS not limited by space or time. In that stage she (pard-vdk) abides 
without any distinction of question and answer which will start 
in pasyantu 


Th^pardvdk which is non-dual i.e. identical with the (supreme) 
consciousness is present in all experients^ always in her integral 
nature (of knowership and doership) uniformly in all states i.e., 
even at the level oi paiyantl, madhyama and vaikhari. Therefore, 
paiyanti comprehends in a general indeterminate {nirvikalpa) way 
whatever is desired to be known if it is awakened by due causal 
conditions just as one who has experienced variegated colour like 
/I t ^ ^ peacock s tail and whose experience is 

y many impressions, positive and negative, recalls 
only hat particular colour which is awakened by the proper 
causal condition of the memory. At the time of initial indeter- 
^nate knowledge in paiyanti in which there is no distinction in 
the word and its referent, there was obviously not any sense of 
dinerence between the word and its referent 

Madhyama, however, which shows the difference between the 
word and Its referent is concerned with its comprehension only in 
the same location {samanadhikaranya) i.e. in the antahkaratia or the 
inner psycluc apparatus.^* In vaikhari, on the other hand; there is 

a clear difference between the two i.e. between the word and its 
referent.® 


When this regular, fixed relation of the word and its referent 
{vyavasthdydrn) is proved in one’s own experience, it wiU be found 


Abhinavagupta 


9 


that what is the stage of para vdk is the power of non-mdyiya word 
and is of the nature of the highest truth. It is unconventional 
{asdmketika)^ natural {akrtaka)^ having as its essence the stamp of 
the highest truth, and is inspired by the truth of the energy of the 
mantra of I-consciousness, the principle of which will be described 
in the sequels. 

She abides in the subsequent conditions of paJyanti etc., also, 
for without her there would accrue the condition of non-mani¬ 
festation, in paiyanti etc., and thus would arise the contingency of 
absolute insensateness (jadatd). 

In that stage (i.e. in the pardvdk stage), there is absolutely 
no thought of difference such as ‘this’ (a particular entity or 
individual),‘thus’ (a particular form),‘here’ (particular space), 
‘now’ (particular time). Therefore, beginning with paiyanti which 
is the initial creative state of the energy of the highest mantra^ 
up to vaikhari in which manifestation of difference of all the 
existents has proceeded fully, this pardvdk full of the wondrous 
delight of her own self, resting within her own self which is all 
Light, continues pulsating {sphurati). That pulsation is I-con¬ 
sciousness whose highest truth is xminterrupted continuity.® This 
matter will be clarified further on. In that {pard;vdk) alone, 
in the paiyanti stage in which there is just an incipience of differ¬ 
ence, in the madhyamd state in which there is an appearance 
of difference (inwardly in the psychic apparatus), which consist 
specifically oijndna (knowledge) and kriyd (activity) respectively— 
jndna which is the predominant attribute of Sadasiva and kriyd 
which is the predominant attribute of Is vara, the wondrous de¬ 
light of I-consciousness which encloses within itself the joy of 
objective existence of inmunerable universes is fully operative. 
Therefore, Supreme Consciousness even while appearing as 
paiyanti and madhyamd actually experiences Herself as the Supreme 
Consciousness. It is this Supreme Consciousness {pard sarrwid) 
that is said to be ‘De^d’ (goddess). 

Notes 

1. The five-fold act refers to (1) srsfi or manifestation, (2) 
sthiti or maintenance, (3) sarphdra or withdrawal or absorption, 
(4) vilaya or veiling the essential nature, (5) anugraha or reveal¬ 
ing the essential nature i.e. grace. 



10 


Para-TrUikd- \ Hvararia 


2. As the Sakti (the Divine Energy) is never different from 
Siva (the Supreme Lord), it is all the same whether one calls 
Sakti as anugrahdimikd i.e. Grace incarnate or Siva as anugrahdtma 
or Grace incarnate. 

3. She is present in all experients and in all conditions as 
the innermost Supreme or Divine Consciousness. The experients 
can be divided under seven broad heads, viz., sakala^ pralaydkala, 
dijndndkala^ mantra^ mantresvara^ mantramahesvara and Sivapranidtd. 
She is present in all of them. 

4. The difference between the word and its referent is, in the 
stage of madhyamd, only in a subtle mental state; it has not yet 
been externalized. Samdnddhikarana means in the same location, 
i.e. antahkarana or the psychic apparatus. 

5. In vaikhariy there is vyadhikarana vimarsa i.e. the location 
of the word is in the mouth, but the location of the referent is in 
external space. 

6. ^ The highest truth of the Divine I-consciousness is that its 
continuity is uninterrupted {auicchinnatdparamdrtham) , It is always 
present in everything. It never takes a holiday. It cannot be 
escaped from. Nothing can elude it, or give a slip to it. That is 
why Siva is said to be immanent in the universe. 

Text 

Different implications of the word Devi: 

^^oraiyatapcdyantyddisrftikramena on p. 3,1. 5 upto devatavyavaharah 
on p. 3, 1. 14 1 y . 


Translation 

(She is called Devi because of the following reasons:) 

. ecause in the succeeding order of creation from pasyanti 
down to external manifestation like blue etc., she sports with the 
creative delight of her consciousness, for the root from which 
the noun Devi is derived means ‘to sport’. 

• ^ 1 ^*^ Divine Bhairava transcends everything and abides 

in an all-exceeding eminence. Because of His desire to remain 
in t at state i.e. because of His desire to overcome and surpass 
everyt ing, and abiding in transcendental eminence who is 
none other than that Divine desire is called Devi, for the root 


Abhinavagupta 


11 


^dw\ from which the word ‘Devi’ is derived also means vijigisd 
i.e. ‘the desire to overcome and surpass’ (there being no differ¬ 
ence between Bhairava and His divine energy, Bhairavi). 

3. Because of her carrying on the activities of life in so many 
innumerable ways of knowledge, memory, doubt, ascertainment 
etc., she is called deoi for the root also means ‘to carry on the 
activities of life’. 

4. Because of shining in the forms of ‘blue’ etc. which appear 
everywhere, (she is called Devi) for the root ‘rftz;’ also means to 
shine or irradiate. 

5. Because of being adored by all who are (inevitably) possess¬ 
ed by Her (Devi’s) light and are devoted to Her (she is called 
Devi) for the root ^div^ also means ‘to adore’. 

6. Because of Her access to all things according to Her will, 
separated though they may be by space and time, (she is called 
De\d), for the root ^div^ also means ‘to go, to have access to’. 

7. Hence ‘divinity’ (devata) applies especially to Bhagavan 
Bhairava. Devi is (reasonably) applied to Bhagavati also, for she 
is His very Sakti. This interpretation of Devi is supported by 
the Science of Grammar which declares that the root ^div' is used 
in the sense of‘sport, the desire to overcome or surpass all, behav¬ 
iour, irradiation, adoration, and movement’. 

Thus the epithet devata is applied also to Visnu, Brahma etc. 
inasmuch as they partially partake of the divinity which is parti¬ 
cularly applicable in its wholeness only to the Highest Lord and, 
which is the same thing, his l§akti. 

Text 

The rationale of the past tense in ‘said’ {uvdca ): 

From evam bhagavati paiyanti madhyama ca on p. 3, 1. 14 upto 
sphufayisyate ca etat on p. 4,1. 15 

Translation 

When the glorious pardvdk becoming paiyanti and madhyama (i.e. 
in the stage of paiyanti and madhyamd) thus recollects Herself, 
“I myself as Paravak Devi said thus”, then (i.e. in that state of 
recollection), shining forth {ullasat) in that form (i.e. z.%pardvdk)^ 
she regards Her own pard stage as past in accordance with the 



12 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


fact of difference brought about by mdyd^ because in comparison 
to Herself that stage (of paSyanti) is the commencement of mdyd^ 
and because of her travelling through the passage of inner senses 
(in the case oimadhyamd) and outer senses (in the case oivaikhari)^ 
whose hfe consists in manifesting difference, she regards the 
para stage as past {paroksatayd). 

The today of Brahma is not limited by the (human) day whose 
division of day depends on the (apparent) motion of the sun. The 
measure of his today is determined by many kalpas} The day of 
Visnu and others is even longer than that, and in the case of 
Yogis tne term day is used even for one-thousandth part of the 
human day on account of his inward motion oiprdna (breath).2 
Thus how can the concept of today or the present which is un¬ 
settled and fictitious apply to unfictitious Consciousness (which 
is beyond time)? 

According to this principle, pardvdk who fulfils the sense of the 
past in all its aspects, viz. sdmdnya bhuta {lufi i.e. aorist), anadya-^ 
tana {lahi.Q,^ imperfect) paroksa (lit. i.e. past perfect) reflects 
thus in the first person oiparoksa (past): ‘‘I the same Paravak 
Devi unseparated from Siva {vdeya) and the Sastra [vdcaka) or 
from the word and its referent thus said.’ This is the sense of the 
use of the past tense. 

(An example of such reflection about the past in the present 
may be cited from common experience i) 

While asleep, I, indeed, bewailed”. In this experience, there 
is the proof of reflection about the past in the present. In the 
above example, the person does not remember the past experi¬ 
ence, for he did not have that experience in the past (and re¬ 
membrance IS only of a past experience). Now after awaking, he 
experiences that state in astonishment either by the great re¬ 
liability of the statement of another person or by perturbation 
due to affections in his body through sobbing etc., caused by 
excessive bewailment, exuberant singing etc. This is not un- 
believable. In an insane condition or in the condition of being 
asleep, I, so they say, uttered moaning sound”—in this statement, 
there is a reference to the past even without any objective experi¬ 
ence in insanity, dream, swoon etc. In XYi^para (supreme) stage, 
there is, indeed, total absence of any object whatsoever. 

Only because this is the experience of the fourth state, the 


Abhinavagupta 


13 


experience in this is identical with the experient whereas in insa¬ 
nity etc., the experience is due mainly to the excess of bewil¬ 
derment. This is the main difference between the two. The past¬ 
ness is, however, common. 

Thus every experient whether situated in the position of a 
teacher or disciple, etc. or in any other capacity, is able to carry 
out all his dealings always by entering her {pardvdk); therefore 
he apprehends her only (in every state). When it is stated, “The 
goddess said”, it means “I (Paravak) only always know every¬ 
thing in an undifferentiated way in the highest stage {pardbhumau)^ 
otherwise this (question-answer matter) would not acquire clear 
expression in the stage of paiyanti and madhyamdJ*^ This is the 
sense of the statement: “The goddess said.” It is in this way 
that the later statement, “Bhairava said,” should be considered. 
There also, the sense of the statement is, “I, only as Bhairava i.e., 
without the division of Siva and Sakti {guru and Hsya in this con¬ 
text) said,” “Only being predominantly the divine Energy", it is 
in her aspect of her creative nature that She {pard) uses the term 
^aharrH (I). Thus being predominantly the possessor of that 
Energy, the delightful experience of Bhairava in His aspect of 
withdrawal or absorption assumes the form of This 

will be clarified later. 

Notes 

1. Kalpa is a fabulous period of time, according to which a day 
of Brahma is one thousand yugas or a period of four thousand, 
three hundred and twenty millions of years of mortals. 

2. The time occupied by z. yogi in samddhi in one circuit of 
respiration covers centuries of external years. 

3. Aham and Ma~ha^ai ^AharrC consists of three letters, viz. 

‘Aa’ and In this ‘a’ denotes Siva, ‘Ac’ denotes Sakti, ^rrC 

denotes ‘warn’ i.e., all objective existents. Thus *‘aharr^ denotes 
the state of manifestation or expansion {prasara) of the Divine 
in objective existence. Aham is known as srsfibija. Ma-ha~a: 
Tliis is the reverse process of aham, i.e., the process of the with¬ 
drawal or absorption {praveSa). In this denotes ‘wara’ or 
objective existents, ha" denotes Sakti, and h" denotes ‘Siva\ 
This is known as saijihara-bija or the process of withdrawal. In 
both cases, Sakti is the medium. In hham"^ Sakti is the medium 



14 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


through which Siva passes into phenomena. In Tna-\-ha-\-a, again, 
Sakti is the medium through which manifestation is absorbed 
into Siva. That is why Sakti is said to be the entrance door in 
Saiva philosophy “^aivi mukham ihocyate". 

The Final Resting Place of all questions and answers 

Text 

From etacca paiyanti madkyamabhuvi on p. 4. I. 15 upto tacchdsana 
pavitritdndm yatnah on p. 6, 1. 12 

Translation 

This is the experience of the highest consciousness characterized 
by will power (i.e. o(pardodk) in the stage of paJyanti and madk- 
yamd, characterized hy jndna Sakti (power of knowledge). This 
is the aim of all the Sastras (the texts indicating the spiritual dis¬ 
cipline) from beginning to end; therefore, there is the actual ex¬ 
perience of the energy of the highest mantra of the I-consciousness 
of the Divine injndnaSakti (power of knowledge) only which is the 
characteristic of Sadasiva because of the appearance of the former, 
i.e. the question of the Devi and the latter, i.e. the answer of 
Bhairava^ therein in the form of the construction of the words 
Devi uvacd and ^Bhairava uvdca' by means of the letters, D, e, v, 
i, u, V, a, ca and Bh, ai, r, a, va, u, v, d, ca. 

It has been rightly said in Svacchanda Tantra: “The God 
badasiva Himself assuming the position of both teacher and 
pupil revealed the Tantra by means of former and latter sen¬ 
tences I.e. by means of question and answer.” (Vol IV KSTS, 
p. 20). 

Thus the power of grace of the Divine is always and in all 
exponents uninterrupted. Therefore, she (the power of Grace) 
alone, the hfe and soul of Trika Sastra, constitutes the highest re- 
ationship (between the exponents and the Divine Consciousness ). 

In the matter o^anuttara, i.e. in order to attain to anuttara (the 
unsurpassable, the Supreme), all other kinds of relationship,^ 
e.g. mahat,^ antardla, divya, adivya, etc. are in accordance with the 
said teaching, aimed at the Supreme only. The same thing has 
been said in Trikahrdaya: 

The highest Lord is always intent on ereativity {yisargapara- 


Abhinavagupta 


15 


mall) through His Sakti. He showers grace, manifests and with¬ 
draws without any restraint (for grace only).’* 

Thus there is always the active presence of anuttara. So the 
inner content i.e., question-answer which appears in the con¬ 
sciousness of the highest Lord in an undifferentiated way because 
of its being the highest truth, is thought of in the paiyanti stage 
in an indeterminate form (in nirvikalpa form) with a desire to put 
it in apportionment of letter, word, and sentence; it is posited 
with a sense of separateness in the madhyamd stage in a determinate 
form (i.e. in savikalpa form); it is finally expressed in the form 
of question and answer in the vaikhari stage i.e. in gross speech 
consisting of mayiya letter, word and sentence, such as ‘how the 
unsurpassable etc.’ 

This is that unobservable face (i.e. Sakti) of Bhairava full 
of the feel of manifestation, of which the essence is the unsurpas¬ 
sable I-consciousness, full of the stirring joy {ksobha)^ brought 
about by the union (samghaita) of Siva who is symbolized by 
and Sakti who is symbolized by ‘a’ which is the source of the 
appearance and extension of manifestation according to the Trika 
system of philosophy and Yoga, which is the original {niaulikam)y 
enduring state {dhruvapadam) and the life of all living beings. 
Therefore, it is not right to associate the Divine with a parti¬ 
cular station^ etc., for in the absence of any limitation in His 
case, designation of a particular place for Him is thoroughly 
unjustifiable. 

The fact of question and answer {vastu) is an ever present 
reality which is in the first instance, i.e. at the level of pardvdk 
without division (i.e. without the division of a question and its 
answer). Therefore, this is all what is meant to be said here. The 
Self who is the natural state of all existents, who is Self-luminous, 
amusing Himself with question-answer which is not different 
from Himself, and in which both the questioner (as Devi) and 
the answerer (as Bhairava) are only Himself, reflects thus as I, 
‘T myself, being thus desirous of wonderful delight knowing the 
truth as it is, appear as question and answer {tathaiva bhavdmi).^^ 
So the book begins with, “The Devi said—how the unsurpassable 
etc.”, says in the middle, “Bhairava said. Listen, O goddess,” 
and ends with “This constitutes Rudrayamala (the pair of Siva 
and Sakti).” 



16 


Para- TrUika-1 'ivarana 


Moreover, from all the Sastras which have come out from five 
sources^ up to worldly dealings—all tlfis is said to be the highest 
relationship {parah sambandhah) 

“In my explanation I, Abhinavagupta, have revealed the 
entire hidden wealth of question-answer mode which has to be 
kept secret, which is the quintessence of the teaching that makes 
one identify oneself with Siva and which always leads oneself in 
experience to the state of Bhairava.” 

However with a desire for the good of my pupils, I am sum¬ 
ming up the w'hole teaching in the following verses; “In all 
dealings, whatever happens whether it is a matter of knowledge 
or action—all that arises in the fourth stage {turyabhuoi) i.e. in the 
paravak in an undifferentiated {gatabhedam) way. In paSyanti 
which is the initial field of the order of succession {kramabhujisu), 
there is only the germ of difference. In madhyama, the distinction 
jneya (object of knowledge) and kdrya (action) appears in¬ 
wardly, for a clearcut succession is not possible at this stage 
{sphutakramayoge ). 

Moreover, madhyama or pasyanti fully relying on para which is 
ever present and from which there is no real distinction of these 
{bhr^am pardm abhedato adhydsya) (later) regards that state as if 
past like a mad man or one who has got up from sleep. 

This state of the unsurpassable will be explained in this way 
(i.e. the subject-matter, nomenclature, connexion, and purpose). 

The same thing has been said by revered Somananda in his 
commentary® (on Paratrifika) in the following words: 

“After the initial pulsation of Energy in the form of Devi uvdca of 
revered Bhairava who is (always) intent upon the fivefold act...”. 

I v/ho have been purified by his (Somananda’s) commentary 
am attempting only to clarify the difficulties (lit., to cut asunder 
the knots)'that have remained in that commentary. 

Notes 

1. There are six kinds of samhandha or relationship between 
the teachers and the taught: 

(1) Para-sambandha: in which the questioner and the 
answerer, the teacher and the taught are both Siva. It is the 
highest relationship. It only means the resolution of all doubts 
by entering anuttara^ i.e. the highest divine consciousness. 


Abhinavagupta 


17 


(2) Mahan sawbandha\ in which the questioner is Sadasiva 
and the answerer is Siva. 

(3) Antardla sambandha : in which the questioner is Ananta- 
bhattaraka and the answerer is Sadasiva. 

(4) Divya sambandhai in which the questioner is the sage, 
Nandakumara and the answerer is Anantabhattaraka. 

(5) Divyadivya sambandha: in which the questioner is the 
sage, Sanatkumara and the answerer is Nandi. 

(6) Adivya sambandha: in which both the questioner and 
answerer are human beings. 

2. Ksobha in this philosophy indicates the urge of manifes¬ 
tation. 

3. For instance the association of Siva with the Kailasa moun¬ 
tain, etc. 

4. The five sources from which all the s^tras have come out 
are the five aspects of Siva, viz. Isana, Tatpurusa, Sadyojata, 
Vamadeva, Aghora. Isana predominantly represents dt iaktii 
Tatpurusa predominantly represents ananda Sakti; Sadyojata re¬ 
presents icchd ^akti; Vamadeva represents jndna iakti^ and Aghora 
represents kriyd ^akti. 

5. This commentary is not available now. 

Text 

From uktafy sambandha!} on p. 6, 1. 12 upto sambandhdbhidheya- 
prayojandni on p. 7,1. 11 


Translation 

The relationship has already been described. Now, we are going 
to describe the abhidheya or subject-matter. Triiikd is a com¬ 
pound word. This is its analysis ‘the iHkd of the three’ {tisrndm 
iHkd), ‘Of the three’ means icchd {WiW)^ jndna (knowledge), 
kriyd {activity).^ The three are also designated by such other 
words as srsti^^ sthitiy sarphdra (with reference to the physical plane) 
or ^udyoga\ ^avabhdsa' and ^cawanS (with reference to the spiritual 
plane). ^Isika! means ^Iivari\ the goddess who governs and 
controls the three i.e. icchdy jndna and kriyd or srsfiy sthiti and 
sarrihdray or udyoga^ avabhdsa, and carvand. It should be borne in 
mind that ^Uand^ or governance or control in this context means 
“being non-different or identical with that which is to be governed 



18 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


or controlled.” Therefore, the revered goddess 'pard §aktV (i.e. 
the supreme divine Consciousness) who at once transcends this 
division of three (viz. srsti^ sthiti, samhdra etc.) and is identical 
with it is the abhidheya or subject-matter of the book, and because 
of its connexion with pard^ the title (lit., name) of this Sastra is 
pardtrihkd. Another reading of trisikd given by venerable teachers 
is tri7nsakd\ and owing to the similarity of words, they give the 
following etymology: 

"^^hich speaks out {kdyati) the three ^akiis or powers” is 
triijisakd. The word trirriJikd derived from its connexion with 
thirty {trimsat) verses is not correct. Even thus, it is not the number 
of verses but only the sense of trinisakd, that should be adopted. 
For instance, it has been said in Tantrasara^: 

The sense of Trirnsaka has been declared by you in a range of 
a crore and half verses.” 

The relationsliip of the title of the book and the subject-matter 
IS that of the supreme, for both refer to the same Reality. This 
has been practically pointed out already. 

. purpose of the Sastra is liberation of all experients 

in hfe-time, experients who have become entitled for this know- 
i^edge of the unsurpassable {anuttara) derived from grace in the 
ormofexcellent descent of divine Sakti (power). This liberation 
connotes penetration with complete identity in the essential 
ure o airava and unification with perfect I-consciousness 
w 1 C IS t e delightful flash of one’s own essential Self and is the 
evement of one who by the realization of his essential nature 
regar s t le entire multitude of the categories of existence sup- 
^ ondage as mere different aspects of his sportfulness 
w 1 C IS t e expression of the abundance of his delight.^ 

t IS averred that liberation is deliverance from those things 
u of existence) which are conventionally considered 

to e on age, deliverance of the individual who lives and grows 
in t le o ^y, prdna etc.^ whose field of activity is the inner and outer 
senses {jnanendriyas and karmendriyas), and which (i.e. the body, 

pra^a etc.) are as drives^ and whose life consists in strenuous 
endeavour. 

If all the impressions {sarnskdra mdtra) caused by (i.e. the 
impressions of difference) vanish, what does the announcement of 
such liberation signify and with reference to what is this liberation? 


Abhinavagupta 


19 


The same idea has been expressed in Spandakarika (in the 
following lines): 

“He, who has this understanding (viz., that the universe is 
identical with the Self), regards the whole world as a play (of the 
Divine), and thus being ever united (with the umversal Consci¬ 
ousness) is, without doubt, liberated while alive (Sp. K. II, 5). 

This will be clarified shortly. Thus this reaUzation (i.e., identity 
of oneself with the perfect I-consciousness of Bhairava) constitutes 
the purpose of the Sastras and so this purpose is the culmination 
of the object of human existence. An inquiry about the purpose 
of purpose is uncalled for. So the connexion, the subject-matter, 
and the purpose have been described.® 


Notes 

1. In the classification according to srsti etc., there are five 
aspects, viz. srsti^ stkiti^ samhdra^ pidhana or vilqya and anugraha 
and according to udyoga etc., there are also five aspects, viz. 
udyoga^ avabhdsa^ carvandy bijdvasthdpana^ and vildpana. Here accor¬ 
ding to three-fold classification, pidhdna and anugraha have been 
included in sarrihdra^ and bijdvasthdpana and vildpana are included 
in carvand for the sake of uniformity. 


2. This book is not available now. 

3. Mukti or Uberation does not mean deUverance firom the 
categories of existence but rather identity with the essentia 
nature of Bhairava or in other words with the perfect I-consci- 


ousness which is the essential nature of one’s own Self. 


4. Etc. refers to puiyasfaka. 

5. By ‘drives’, Abhinava does not mean that they drive one to 
misery, but that they drive or push the individual to higher life; 
their very short-coming acts as a stimulus for rising to a higher 


life. 

6. This refers to what is known as aTuibandluicatusfuyd, or 


four 


indispensable elements of any iastra. They are (1) the prayojana 
or purpose or aim, (2) the adhikati, i.e. one who is competent for 
the study of the particular idstra, (3) the subject-matter 

of the iastra, (4) sambandha or relationship or connexion between 
the title of the Sdstra {abhidhand) and the subject-matter {abhi~ 


dheya). 

(1) Abhinavagupta says that the prayojana or purpose of the 



20 


Pard-TriSikd-Vivarnna 


iastra is mukti or liberation, but he scouts the popular idea of 
mukti as deUverance from the vehicles of the Self or from the 
catepnes {tattvdni) of existence. He vaUantly maintains that 
mukti only means identification of the self with the Supreme 
1-consciousness of the Divine. 

(2) Abhinava has not directly used the word adhikdri, but has 

suggested it m "vibhoh parasaktipdldnugrahavaiotpannaitdvadanut- 
tarajndnabhdjanabhdvdndne (P.T., p. 6, 1. 22) i.e. they alone are 

fit to Judy this sastra in order to attain mukti who are oriented 
towards the Lord through grace. 

(3) With regard to abhidheya or subject-matter, Abhinava 
jysthatit is samvidbhagavatibbattdrikdpara (P.T., p. 6 1.15 H e the 

!ve^r"fl"'h the Supreme Divine Sak’ti’that 

flashes as I and expresses itseKinpardvdk or Supreme Sound. 

dbL-hh-l^^"" is concerned, Abliinava says, ^'abhi- 

dhanabhidheyayoscaparaevasnmbandhaktdddtmydt- (PT p 6 1 2n 

S: subject-matter and the 

the Supreme, for both refer to the same Supreme Reality. 

Text 

p From atha granlimh, ..akhyajale on p. 7. 1, 12 up,„ HyMi on 


Translation 

tion. He has explained i. i„ six.eerC)'.'’""'™'" 

‘not’ ^^^erpreted as ‘more, additional’, ‘a/z’ means 

yataV ie ‘Th"” ’ ^neans ‘wa vidyate uttaram adhikam 

The other tR^; tnore, or additional’, 

srita Sivai whosVve^ytxiTof existence) upto Ana- 

the consciousness of hLhes't^l''^-'" ^t^trance into 

existence to Para Pu, • ^ Bhairava (i.e. which owe their very 
as something P^’Jit to the Consci^ 

tbi<; i<! tVira la’ u a Superior to themselves. Not like 

7-1 a 7 . i^v does not point to anything more or 

higher than Itself), because of its essence being unrestrained, non- 
relative, delightful flash of knowership. 


Abhinavagiipta 


21 


2. Anuttara is that state in which there is neither question, nor 
answer (i.e. in which a question formulated in ^Devi uvdca^ or an 
answer formulated in ^Bhairava uvdca^ does not arise). It is that 
ocean of supreme Consciousness, from which arises infimte know¬ 
ledge upto that of Anasrita Siva, and by which the pupil be¬ 
comes competent for the clarity of the question to be raised. It is, 
in fact, that Reality which is ever awake. In that state how can 
there ever be an occasion for another answer (than the perfect 
Bhairava Consciousness) which comes from a preceptor or Guru? 

3. ^Uttara^ means crossing i.e. liberation. This is the libera¬ 
tion accepted by the dualists. This does not go beyond the fixed 
order of things. 

According to this, one has, first of all, to enter from the stage of 
body to the stage of prdna^ then the stage of buddhi^ i.e. one at 
first considers the body to be the Self, then the prdna^ and then the 
buddhi to be the Self, then the stage of prana (the universal prana- 
iakti spandanakhyariijivanarupatdm ), then the state of the void which 
connotes the dissolution of all objectivity, and then on attmning 
the highest pitch {atiiayadhdrdprdptau) of the successive dinunu- 
tion of all the malas (limitations), the emprical individual is freed 
on the manifestation of the state of Siva. All this stupendous 
ascension is, indeed, futile (for were not the previous stages also 
the expression of Siva?). 

4. Similarly, rising of the ^akti from the navel to the heart, 
then to the throat, then to the palate, then to the top of the head 
{brahma i.e., sahasrdra)^ then to the Bhairava bila (the point above 
the sahasrdra) in an upward succession is ascension. Anuttara 
signifies that in this Saiva Agama, mounting to Bhairava by an 
upward succession through the six cakras is not indispensable {na 
vidyate uttarali i.e. urdhvataranakramah yatra). 

5. Uttar a also means ‘that from which one has to go beyond’ 
i.e., bondage or the world. It also means ‘crossing over’ i.e. 
moksa or deliverance. 

Therefore, anuttara is that in which there are no such cros¬ 
sings (i.e. according to anuttara, the world is not really bondage, 
and when the world is not bondage, the question of deliverance 
does not arise). 

6. Uttara also means speaking in a limited way (about Rea¬ 
lity) e.g. ‘It is like this, it is like that’, i.e. limiting Reality in these 



22 


Para-Trisikd- Vivarana 


ways. Therefore, amttara is that which has not got limitations. 
It is unlimited, infinite Reality. 

7. Even pointing to Highest Reality2 by the mere word ‘this' 
IS also limiting it, for such indication is also hmitation. Thus be¬ 
cause of its sense of exclusion {vyavacchedakatvdt), even a simple 
denotation as ‘this’ is only a vikalpa i.e. a mere thought-construct, 
because of its essence being ‘hmitation’ {vyaccheda-prdnameva). 
Therefore, so long as an empirical experient {mdyiyah pramdtd) is 
desirous of entering anuttara (the Supreme Reality) so long he 
remains in mkalpa (thought-construct) of a particular form (i.e. 
\x).samddhi). In this context, (it must be borne in mind) that that 
which IS mdcterimnate {avikalpitam) and necessarilv inherent in 
everything {avmdbhdvi) that is really anuttara (Supreme Con- 
ousness), for without it even a determinate concept cannot ap¬ 
pear {tadvind kalpitarupasphurandt). In fact, in anuttara {tatra), 
mip concentration etc. {bkavanadeh) are wholly inap¬ 

plicable. Therefore, it (anuttara) has been declared (by'Soma- 
nan a) to be beyond contemplation, karana, etc. Not that bhd- 
vana is wio y useless, (i.e. it can only bring about the purifi- 

lono mind, butnotthereahzationofan««ami. Such araWara 

of tfi Z anuttara) abides even in the life 

has awareness). It 

has been (thus) said by myself in one of my hymns: 

is not vkTl (avicchidaivapatan) 

clearlv ' ‘W far-spreading sky (oitata iva nabhasi) but it is 

^ves of t r" the forL or the 

too sumI Supreme Bhairava, being 

circumsta’ ^PPears in the range of experience. Under the 

oend on s ’ fconnexion with means which de- 
o™sl v """’ state that that consci- 

f R1 instantaneously in them in whom the aware- 

of thv IS subdued the consciousness that is indicative 

ol thy presence, O Lord !” 

So it will be said further that what is posited as an answer is 
really no answer. Now we proceed further with the explanation 

^ Thus the ^akta updya is said to be higher than the nara i.e. 
dnava upaya. Sdrnbhava updya is higher even than that (i.e. sdkta 
upaya). Even in Sdrnbhava updyas there is a hierarchy among them- 


Abhinavagupta 


23 


selves in the (orms bhuta^ tattva, mantra, mantreivara^ (joA^ietc.). 
Again even among physical elements, there is a hierarchy 
in the form of the earth, water etc. The dreaming is higher 
than the waking, sleep is higher than that (dream); the fourth 
state (iurya ) is higher than that (sleep); the state beyond the 
fourth (turydtita^ is higher than that (i.e. the turya^. Even in the 
waking condition there is a hierarchy of these states among 
themselves through four^ varieties. I have conclusively dis¬ 
cussed this matter in detail in Sripurvapahcika.® I have not des¬ 
cribed it here in detail, because that will serve no useful purpose, 
and will unnecessarily increase the volume of the book. This 
kind of uttaratva (hierarchy) only shows higher and lower and 
contains the delusion of dualism. 

9. Uttara (in anuttara) is used in an abstract sense in which 
there is no indication of superiority or inferiority as in the division 
of brdhmana, ksattriya, vai§ya, iudra, the lowest caste (the caste 
last in order). 

10. Uttara (is used) in the sense of Saktis like paSyanti^ etc. 

11. Uttara may mean iaktis like Aghora and others.*^ 

12. Uttara may mean ‘para" etc.® Anuttara is that where these 
don’t exist. 

13. Anuttara may be analysed into a~\-nut'\‘tara. The noun 
*‘nut* is derived from the root ^nud* which means to impel, to push, 
and tara means crossing, going beyond the worldly existence. 
Nuttara would, therefore, mean ‘going beyond the worldly 
existence through impulsion’ by the process of initiation. 

The guru (spiritual guide) sets in motion his own consciousness 
in the consciousness of the disciple. Thus he (the guru) applies 
an initiation which is intended to bring about liberation {moksada) 
by means of the process {paripdtyd) of the central point {pisuvat)^ 
etc. which is devoid of the movement of prana (exhalation) and 
apdna (inhalation) breaths which assume the utterance oiharnsa, 
and is the junction of both and by the difference olsthdndy^ on the 
sakala niskala}^ initiation and through the practice ot'yojanikd}^ 
initiation on the occasion of the last function of the complete 
oblation. 

Now in all these, how is this kind of mockery made of the un¬ 
surpassable consciousness {anuttara caitanya) that is self-luminous, 



24 


Paid’- Trliikd- Vivarana 


omnipresent, unmodified, i.e. unrestricted by the limitation of 
space, time and form?^^ 

Therefore anuttara is that in which a crossing over does not 
occur by such impulsion as will be said in: ‘^Thus initiation that 
leads one to liberation is achieved only in the case of one who 
knows the Truth in reality” (P. T. v. 26). 

14. from the root ‘an’ ‘to breathe’ with the sufRx 'kvip' 

means one who breathes. Thus ‘Jn’ means am or the empirical 
individual whose hfe consists in breath and who considers his 
gross body {deha) or the subtle body (purjastaka) etc., i.e. prana 
as the belf. Similarly ananam may mean life (prdnand), existing 
in the body etc., consisting of different powers devoid of I-con- 
sciousness, as in the case of one \\'ho is known as sunja-pramdtd.^* 
o anuttara would mean superiority over the empirical individual 
and the sunya-pramdtd, having preponderance over everything, 

Braira'a'HiLer" 

sent^ world full of Sentient and insentient existents, the non- 

ones Tb^rr'^f dependence on the sentient 

mentioned beings consists indeed in the afore- 

oJher of knowledge and action in the case of 

other experients also (paratra) as in one’s own. Only the bodies 
etc. appear as different. 

tin^ffon^fr ^^ery one without any dis- 

tuTaZk i. one whether he is deha-pramdtd, 

LnrArfT This indeed is the highes 

truth. As has been said by revered Utpaladeva: 

livin^blings?’ bfe of 

leds-e and ^ only in knowledge and activity, i.e. know- 

edge and activity alone are symbolic of life. 

or analysed as a+nut+tara meaning the tara 

or flotation of the nut or impulsion of‘a’. ‘A’ is the Sakti (kald) 
o IS a ove the range of mayd (amdyiya), who is not found in 
Smti-sastra (i.e. in the Vedic tradition), who is the bliss (camat- 
ara, o the very waveless ocean of consciousness abiding in the 
natural, supreme Light, who covers both the initial and the final 
stage of the perfect I-consciousness (i.e. both ‘a’ and ^harrC the 
anskrit word for ‘I’), which comprehends the entire cosmos 


25 


Abhinavagupta 

which is the expression of the creative delight of Sakti. Nut i.e. 
impulsion is the culmination of the expansion {visargdntata)^^ of 
that (i.e. kala). Tar ah means the flotation or swimming of that 
nut i.e. the continuance of that state over everything else. (The 
sense is that though anuttara in its expansion is denoted by Sakti 
and nara^ yet it is never separated by these. It pervades up to the 
very end). 

16. Anuttara is now analysed as anut+tara. ‘A’ in anut means 
avidyamana (not existing), ^nut^ in *‘anuC means impulsion i.e. 
successive action {kratndtmakd-kriya) depending on the duality 
of going and coming i.e. movement in space and time. So anut 
means that in which there is no impulsion of the successive move¬ 
ment {kriydmayi prerand). 

This ^anui* is well-known among people as dkdia (ether) etc. 
i.e. iunya or void (for in dkdia or void, there is no possibility of 
coming and going etc.). 

'‘Tara^ is a sign of comparison, meaning better, higher. So 
^anuttara* means higher even than dkdia or ether. 

In ^dkdia^ (ether) etc. also there may be said to be successive 
action on account of incidental contact with ajar or various other 
incidental contacts and on account of constant and intimate 
connexion as that of sound. In the supreme Consciousness, how¬ 
ever, which has as its essence, the sovereign power of thoroughly 
uninterrupted, absolute Freedom, which has I-consciousness full 
of the entire multitudinous objectivity characterized by thisness, 
the condition of which is accepted {svikrta) by Siva but is viewed 
with hesitancy {iahkyamdna)y byAnasrita Siva, with a feeling of 
ease characterized by delight in differentiated objectivity {vicchin- 
na-camatkdramaya-vUrdntyd)y which is ever beyond all appearance 
{nirdbhdse)y but which is always shining in manifestation, 
in which what was non-appearance for Anasrita Siva has been 
accepted as appearance by Siva {svikdrdbhdsikrtdndbhdse)y the 
activity of I-consciousness is successionless, because of the absence 
of the relativity of space and time which are characterized by 
objectivity (in manifestation) and absence of objectivity (in 
withdrawal), which is full of the delight of its own consciousness, 
well known in the matsyodari^^ and mata idstra. This succession¬ 
less I-consciousness is the anuttara (supreme, unsurpassable). 



26 


Pard-TrUifcd- Vivarana 


(Now Abhinavagupta takes up the question as to why the word 
anuttara has been used instead of anuttama .) 

According to the rule of grammar, the suffix tamap (i.c. tama) 
is used (in the superlative degi'ee of adjective), denoting that 
which surpasses every tiring {atisayamdtra) , but the suffix tarap 
(i.e. taxa, denoting comparative degi'ee) has been used here which 
shows only a comparison of two things. For instance rvhen we 
say, ‘This is whiter’, what we mean is that of two things both of 
which are wliite, one has more whiteness (atUayena hiklah) than 
the other. But in the sentence ‘of these wlrite things, this has 
more whiteness’—what is the additional sense in this? For in¬ 
stance in: ^‘This palace is white, this cloth is white, this swan is 
also white’, that which has the greatest wlriteness is said to be 
whitest {suklatama). The palace is also wlrite, the cloth is also 
white—-what additional information has been given in ‘the 
whitest ? Therefore in the tamap suffix, the formation of the sen¬ 
tence in the above way is inappropriate. The tamap suffix does 
not describe anything more than tire tarap suffix. 

This is what is meant to be said: “The tamap suffix is used 
when a particular correlative is not intended to be spoken about 
^ e \\ en t eie is no comparison between two), the tarap suffix 
IS used with reference to a correlative (i.e. rvhen there is compari¬ 
son between two). The secondary word (upapada) is used when 
there is a distinction made by a dual numirer with reference to a 
correWe. One only is a correlative. ‘Of the two, this is more 
e m s, a third is not acknowledged. For expressing 
speci c ascertainment, the first is considered to have a corre- 
lative. There is no expectancy of more than two in comparison. 
There IS comparison of only one simultaneously with reference to 
the other. In using the tamap affix by way of gradation, one does 
not get ^y additional information. The use of ‘tarap' and 
tamap suffix in the sense of graded or comparative value is onlv 
conventional; it has no regular or proper derivation. It is not 
in accordance with the sense of ‘tarap' and ‘tamap' suffix. If 
tarap and tamap indicate graded excellence, so may and 
tamya also. Enough of displaying ability unnecessarilv regarding 
a matter a bn of which we have heard from scholars. 

Here it is in order to indicate graded correlatives along with 
uttara that the tarap suffix has been used. Even if there ^vere no 


Abhinavagupta 


27 


occasion to express correlatives, the usage of 'anuttamam would 
also have borne the same sense. 

So in another Agama, it has been said; 

“There is no one to whom that unspecified Highest Reahty 
{anuttamam) is unknown which, however, is not known even now- 
to the wise who have become perfect in sadhana (spiritual 
praxis).”” (Even no^v means even w'hen so-calledjnana has been 

acquired.) 

Thus the imsurpassable {anuttara) is that whose essence is 
absolute Freedom, which is not determined by time, i.e. which 
transcends all temporal concepts, which is an embodunent of 
activity {kriydiaktiY^- 

The same thing has been said by revered Utpaladeva in the 
following lines: 

“It is only in w'orldly activity that there is succession, due to 
the Lord’s power of time (kdlasakti) but there can be no succession 
in the eternal activity {kriydJakti) of the highest Lord (which is 
of the nature o(vimarIa) just as there is no succession in the Lord 

Himself” (I.P.K. V. II, 1, 2).” . 

Thus this unsurpassable Reality {anuttara) has been explained 
in sixteen ways. In the Trikasara^® also, it has been said. 

'^Anuttara is the heart (centre) of all. There is a knot m that 
heart. Knowing that knot to be sixteen-fold, one should perform 
one’s actions at ease.”^^ 

Similarly, ‘‘The knot abiding in the heart can be untied only 
by Anuttara Himself.” 

Notes 

1. The following form the thirty-six tattvas or categories ot 
existence according to this commentary. 

Mahabhutas (gross physical elements) —5 (earth, water, air, 

fire, ether) 

Tanmatras 5 (.,apa, rasa, gandha, 

iabda, sparia) 

c: 

Jnanendnyas 

K armendriyas ^ 

Buddhi, Manas, Ahamkara 3 

Prakrti ^ 

Purusa ^ 



28 


Maya together with her five kancukas 

Suddha vidya 

Isvara 

Sadasiva 

Anasrita Siva and his Sakti 


P ara-TrUikd-Vivarana 


6 

1 

1 

1 

2 


36 


Reality cannot be designated as ‘this’ for that 
would only objectify it, whereas the Highest Reality can never be 
objectified. It is the Eternal Subject. 

3. Avinabhdvi is that which is necessarily inherent in everything. 
Th^ akalpua or indeterminate is the avinabhdvi, for without the 
indeterminate, the determinate {kalpita) cannot e.xist. 

voL I^rKSTS edT Tantraloka, 

5. These four varieties are ( 1 ) idorot-idomt (o\ ■- , 

(3) jasral.sufup,i, ^ ^ 

6. This book is not available now. 

of speli“' and not gradations 

7. The Saktis (powers) referred to are: 

the'rLHzl“fffe,'^‘ “"'““oncd experients to 

sur2’aS‘“re ""“y Plea- 

f 3 tTt, , *n way oflibcration. 

waid pathTn 

8. These are: 

(2) Parapa^slkr^"®t-^^°'^^ ^ of identity with Siva. 

ThSi tlT ^ of difference, 

and Ghoratari sTkfiI°'‘' ^^hora, Ghora 

middletT/Cn^S7^^ -- --ns 

middlemost, central. In a specialized or technical sense it means 
equinox-a point where day and night become equL 4" 
jdea common both cases is a central point where L forces 
become equal. //c»nc prd^a means idvsd-rspt prdna. ‘ffam’ is a 




Abhinavagupta 


29 


symbolic word for the utterance indicated by prana (exhalation) 
and ^saft" is a symbolic word for the utterance indicated by apdna 
(inhalation) breath. So ^hamsaprdna-iunya-vimvat" means that 
central point where both prana and apdna are equally balanced, 
the middle-most point where there is neither prdna nor apdna 
(hanisaprdnddiiunyavisuvat)^ the zero point intermediate between 
prdna and apdna. It is at such a point that the guru impels the 
consciousness of the disciple in the universal consciousness. 
Prabhrti^ i.e. et cetera refers to abhijit. It is also symbolic of the 
meeting point of the prdna and apdna. The difference between 
the two is that in visuvat^ the neutral or zero point comes at the 
end of prdna and commencement of apdna^ whereas in abhijit^ it 
comes at the end of apdna and commencement of prdna. 

10. Sthdna-bheda refers to the difference of bdhyadvadaidnta and 
dntaradvddaJdnta. 

11. Sakala and niskala initiation: 

Sakala initiation is for one who after realization of the Supreme 
wants to remain in the world and help others in their realization 
of liberty. By initiation, the future and past karmas of such a 
disciple are destroyed, but his prdrabdha karma (i.e. karma which 
has commenced to bear fruit) is untouched so that he may re¬ 
main in the physical body in order to liberate other souls. A 
parallel may be noticed in the Bodhisattva of Buddhism. 

Niskala initiation is for one who only wants his liberation and 
is not concerned with the liberation of others. A parallel may be 
noticed in the Pratyeka Buddha of Buddliism. 

For details, see Tantraloka, 15th Ahnika, verse 30 ff. 

12. Tojanikd diksd: In this, the guru unites the consciousness 
of the disciple to a particular tattva according to his desire. Cf. 
^Hato yadi bhogecchuh sydt tato yatraiva tattve bhogecchd asya bhavati 
tatraiva samastavyastataydyojayeP\ Tantrasara, p. 159. 

13. It is not modified by deia (space) i.e. it is vydpaka or all- 
pervading, not modified by kdla (time) i.e. it is nitya or eternal, 
not modified by any particular dkdra or form, i.e. it is visvdkdra 
i.e. all-containing. 

14. $unya pramdtd: having the experience of only void. He is 
devoid of I-feeling in respect of the various powers of the senses; 
he is also devoid of the sense of objectivity. He has simply life 
without even the breath. 



30 


Pard-Trifikd^ Vi va rana 


15. The culmination of the Sakti in her visarga or expansion 
consists in aham, of this ‘j’ is symbolic of abheda i.e., unity 

is symbolic of bheda or diversity, the anusvdra or dot on '‘ha' is 
symbolic of bhedabheda i.e, unity in diversity. These three are 
known as para visarga^ apara visarga and pardpara visaroa. 

16. Matsyodari: The belly of the fish keeps throbbing inwardly 
without any external movement. So the I-consciousness keeps 
throbbing without movement. 

17. The wise want to know it by reason, and fail miserably. 
The common people know it instinctively as the ground of all 
existence. 

13. kriydsakti jhdiia^akti also. 

19. There is no succession in Tconsciousness. It is uninterrup¬ 
ted. So it is beyond time. The anuttara is the Lord’s I-conscious¬ 
ness, and so successionless i.e. beyond temporal concept. 

20. Trikasarasastra is not available now. 

21. The sixteen knots arc the following: 

Reality is expressed in (1) prameya or object, (2) pramdna or 
knowledge, (3) pramdtd or subject of knowledge, (4) pramiti 
or non-relational knowledge, i.e. knowledge without subject- 
object relation. Each of these four has four states viz. srsti^ stkiti, 
samhdra and andkhya. Thus altogether, they make up sixteen. 

Text 

From tata idrk on p. 11,1. 11 upto vydkhydtam on the same page. 


Translation 

(Now Abhinavagupta gives three interpretations on katham 
(how) of the verse.) 

( Katham may be taken in the sense of an Instrumental Case— 
tntiydrtha. Then its meaning will be like the following:) 

1. In what way {kena prakdrena) is such anuttara to be realized: 
by abandoning the uttara or the world or otherwise? 

(It may be taken in the sense of Nominative Case, prathamdrtha. 
Then its meaning will be like the foliov/ing:) 

2. What is this \Vay? Since anuttara is all this multitude of 
knowledge {jhdna^y object of knowledge {jheya) (and knower i.e. 
jndtd) which meets on all sides mutual opposition consisting of 


Abhinavagupta 


31 


difference, therefore, there are bound to be superiority and in¬ 
feriority. What is this kind of anuttara with higher and lower 
grade? 

(It may be taken in the sense of Locative Case, saptamyartha. 
Then its meaning will be like the following:) 

3. In which way is there anuttara in liberation or even in what 
is supposed to be bondage? Since there is no definite rule regar¬ 
ding taking the ^tharrC suffix in the sense ot any particular case, 
and since it can be taken in a general sense of kind or sort, this 
question beginning with ^katham^ concerns only kind or sort. 
The word 'deva' has already been explained. 

(Now Abhinavagupta explains sadyah kaulika-siddhidain ol the 
verse.) 


Text 

From kularn stfiula sukpna etc. on p. 11, 1. 17 upto kirnaparena 
vdgjdlena on p. 13, 1. 10. 

Translation 

(First interpretation kaulika^siddhidafn) 

'Kula' is gross {sthfda), subtle {sftkma), and ulterior {para), 
prana (life-breath), indrijia (senses), bhutadi (the five gross phy¬ 
sical elements) both in a collective sense (i.e. in the sense of 
totality of manifestation),^ and in the sense of cause-effect. As 
has been said: “By reason of action (only) in collaboration with 
another” (Y.S. IV, 24).=* 

So kula or totality is so called, because Consciousness itself 
abides in the various forms of objectivity'^ (jathavasthandt)^' by 
means of coagulation* and Consciousness itself (voluntarily)® 
assumes bondage by its own Freedom. It is said: “The word 
‘kuld" is used in the sense of coagulation and kindred.” {samstyane 
bandhusu ca).^ 

Without Consciousness which is Light itself, no entity which 
is devoid of the light of manifestation {aprakasamanam vaptih) can 
acquire existence. 

Now 'kaulikV is that which is related to the ^vhole universe 
including the body; siddhi or achievement is the acquisition of 
bliss {anafida) by turning round {parivrtyay to have a firm hold 
on that very principle i.e. the light of the universal consciousness 



32 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


{tathdtda-ddrdhyarri), in other words, identity with the perfect 
I-feeling of Siva, who is the highest Consciousness and whose 
nature is spanda or the eternal throb of delight in manifestation 

{hrdaya-svabhdva-parasammddtmaka-Siva-mmarsa-tdddtmyam ) . So 'kau- 

lika-siddhidanC is that which enables one to have such achieve¬ 
ment. In other words, by achieving identity with anuttara, the 
.otality of manifestation becomes like that anuttara itself. 

As has been said in the following lines: 

By means of negative and positive proof® (vyatireketardbhydm) 
there is settled conviction concerning the Self {nijdtman) and 
objectivity {anya, lit., the other). Such conviction is known as 
ty (vyavastkiti) , firm standing (pratisthd), complete attain¬ 
ment {siddhi), and final beatitude {nirortti).” 


(Interpretation of the word sadyah) 

The word ^sadyah' is used in the sense of ‘on the same day’ 
U« = same adya=d^y). As has been said previously, there is no 
c ^ of the day or the present (i.e. it is only conventional). 

O 3 saya^ in this context means at the same instant. Sameness 
here does not connote sameness of the moment, but rather ‘ter- 
mnating in Reality’ {tattvaparyavasdyi) , for it is in this way that 
the sadyah is to be understood. Therefore xi sadyah is to be 

e in t 0 sense of at that very moment’, then on account of the 

ation o the piesent moment, the past and future moments 
would be rejected, and thus the present whose life consists in its 
eing reckoned relatively with reference to the past and the 
future will also have to be rejected. 

f (total objectivity) that has been described (so 

nu collective whole (ra^-m) of the rays® of the divine Sun, 
1 essence of Light (in its external 

spect). en, however, that {kuLa) acquires nirodha (rest, 
^oppage) y identification with the inner supreme Bhairava 
Consciousness, then it is full of the relish of the ambrosia of 
supreme bhss, is anuttara (transcendent to all aspects and phases), 
beyond space and time, eternal of the form of visarga,^'^ and ever- 

risen. The same thing has been said in Vadyatantra^i in the 
following lines: 

Having retained (within one’s essential nature) one’s entire 
group oUaktis (that are extroverted) and having (thus) drunk 


Abhinavagupta 


33 


incomparably the most exquisite nectar (of Self-realization), one 
should abide happily in that state^2 (of self-realization), unrest¬ 
ricted by the past and the future.’* 

At another place, I have described in detail the non-restrictive 
characteristic of both these times (i.e. the past and the future). 

(Second interpretation of kaulika-siddhidam) 
Kaulika-siddhi means siddhi or achievement of definite experi¬ 
ence of objects derived through kula i.e. by means of the body, 
prdnay and puryastaka. The siddhi (achievement) consists in the 
definite grasp of blue, pleasure etc. (i.e. objective and subjective 
experience) which are completely diverse (lit., whose life consists 
of diversity). Kaulika-siddhidaniy therefore, means that which 
gives i.e. brings about the definite grasp of objective and sub¬ 
jective phenomena by means kula i.e. by means of the body, 
prdnay and puryastaka. Indeed it is the body, mind, etc., which, 
through the penetration in them of the energy of the eternal ‘a’ 
i.e. ‘Siva’, and His externalizing Sakti symbolizing ^ha\ the 
energy that is beyond the sphere of time and that mounts the 
intermediate stair of prdna etc., which bring about the success in 
the form of the definite perception of the existing entities.^^ As 
has been said, 

‘Tt is rather by coming in contact with the power of the Self 
that the empirical individual is equal to that (i.e. the divine 
Being)” (Sp. K. I, 8). 

Similarly, 

‘‘Resorting to that power (of spanda tattva)^ the divinities. 
Mantra etc., being endowed with the power of omniscience 
proceed to carry out their assigned functions towards the embodied 
ones just as the senses of the embodied ones by resorting to the 
power of proceed to carry out their (specific) functions” 

(Sp. K. II, 1). 

(Third interpretation of kaulika-siddhidam) 

Kula means—though kula of the form of SiVa-Sakti is close at 
hand, i.e. though it is present in eyery one, it is not realized by 
all. Siddhi means, according to the principle already described, 
liberation in life itself (in the form of identity with the divine 
consciousness) generating the much sought-after supernormal 



34 


Para-TrUikd- Vivarana 


powers, animdP etc. Sadyah means spontaneously without any 
effort or anticipation {andkalitam eva) i.e. without contemplation 
{bhdvandy^, karana^^ etc. So 'kaulika-siddhidam' means that which 
brings about liberation in life (in the form of unification with the 
divine consciousness) generating spontaneously without the 
effort of contemplation etc., the much sought-after powers of 
anxmd etc. 

As has been said by revered Somananda:^® 

“Because of Siva’s being present always, what is the use of 
contemplation, karana etc.?” (S.D. VII, 101) 

Similarly, (it is said in the following lines): 

Having once acquired the knowledge of omnipresent Siva 
with firm conviction through experience {pramana'), the scripture, 
and the statement of the guru, there is nothing to be done any 
more by means oi karana or bhavand.” (S.D. 5b-6). 

(Fourth interpretation of kaulika siddhidatn') 

Kaulika means kule-jdtd i.e., born or sprung in kida. Siddhi 
means the achievement of the appearance of diversity, beginning 
with the expansion of ^ha\ the expression of Sakti’s deUght and 
ending with the evolution of the multitude of external existents. 
That which brings about such achievement is kaulikasiddhidarn. 

It is anuttara^ itself of the nature of eminent Light, which has 
irnplicitly within itself the expansion of the universe as identical 
with consciousness,!" that explicitly evolves diversity through the 
abundance of the delight of power issuing from its own unsur¬ 
passed Freedom. Mdyd or prakHi which is not Light of Consci¬ 
ousness {aprakasarupatn) cannot be the cause of the manifesta¬ 
tion of existents. If that is supposed to be of the nature of Light, 
then It certainly is the exalted Lord Bhairava Himself. Then 
what IS the use of another snare of words? 

Notes 

1. A ula or the totality of manifestation appears in three forms, 
viz., gross (Asubtle (JilArjwza) and the ulterior [para) either 
as material object or as the body. In the case of the body it is 
known as sthula sarifa, suksma-^arira, and para or karana §arira. 
In the sense of cause-effect® it means that bhutadi or panca mahd- 
bhutas, the five gross physical elements, viz., earth, water, fire, air, 
and ether are the effect of sthula or gross matter, the indriyas or 


Abhinavagupta 


35 


senses are the effects of subtle or suksma matter, and prana is the 
effect of the para or ulterior matter. 

2. This is a quotation from Patafijali’s Yoga-Sutras (IV, 24). 
The full Sutra is as follows: 

tadasarnkhyeyavasanabhUcitramapi pararthatti samhatyakaritodt. 
i.e. “That, viz. the citta or mind though variegated by innumer¬ 
able sub-conscious impressions exists for another (i.e. the pur^a 
or Self) by reason of its acting in collaboration with another i.e. 
because of interdependently joint causation. 

3. Tathdvasthdndt means that every material object appears m 
its own space, time and form. 

4 . Aiydnarupatayd or ‘by means of coagulation’ means that 
subtle energy of consciousness assumes the solid form of matter, 
but even in that thickened mass of matter, consciousness does not 
lose its nature, even as water in becoming ice does not lose its 
nature. 

5 . The kula or totality of matter assumes bondage or limitation 
nQt any compulsion, but bodhasvatantiyadcva^ by the inherent 
Freedom of the divine Consciousness, i.e. the divine Conscious¬ 
ness voluntarily descends into the limitation of matter. 

6 . The double entendre in ‘bandhusu" cannot be brought out 
in translation. The word ‘bandhu' is derived from the root ‘bandh’ 
which means to bind, "badhndti manah snehadina iti bandhuJ}'. A 
kindred or friend is called 'bandhu' because he binds the mind by 
affection etc. In bandhabhimanat, A.G. suggests that 'kula' binds 
or limits not only in the sense of matter, but also in the sense of 
kindred or friend. 

7. Parivftya is a very significant expression in this context. 
Parivrtya means ‘turning round, going back’ to its origin. 'Pari- 
vrttV the noun form of the verb 'parivrf is a technical word of this 
system. It is defined as 'idantatmakarri viSvdbhdsam ahantdtmani 
pumSbhdse sarristhanarn' —the entire objective manifestation appear¬ 
ing as ‘this’ abiding in the full blaze of perfect I-consciousness of 
the divine’. The kauliki siddhi comes when the fragment returns 
to the whole, the perfect I-consciousness. The objective pheno¬ 
mena then appear as a ray of the noumenal Light. 

8 . 'Vyatireka-itardbhydtrC — 'Vyatireka' means exclusion, a negative 
proof, Htara' means other than vyatireka, i.e. anvaya or positive 
proof. Vyatireka is defined as 'yadabhave yadabhava/f i.e. it is that 



36 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


where in the absence of one, the absence of the other also occurs. 
‘'Anvqya’ is defined as ‘yalsatlveyatsattvarrC i.e. it is that where in the 
presence of the one, the presence of the other also occurs. 

9. Rays or rasmicakra means sakti-cakra or the collective whole 
of the saktis of the Divine. 

10 . Anutlara dhruva is the ‘a’ or the supreme Siva, the first 
letter of aham\ Vtsarga is the expansion of ‘aham' upto the anu- 
svara i.e. the nasal sound wliich is marked by a dot on 'ha’ in 
aham. Thus ‘a’ in aham represents Siva, 'ha’ represents ‘Sakti’. 
the anusvdra represents the fact that though Siva is manifested 
right upto earth through Sakti, he is not divided thereby; he 
remains undivided [ambhdgavedandtmaka-bindu-rupatayd). 

Visarga-. The very nature of anutlara or Siva-Sakti is visarga 
or expansion which has two aspects, viz., srsti or e.xpansion in 
manifestation upto nara or phenomena and samhdra or return 
movement fiom phenomena to Siva. The whole cosmic plav of 
srsti sarjihdra is of the nature of visarga. The visarga is indicated 
in srsti with two dots above one another (;) and also bv the dot 
on aham which is only half visarga. Half of 'ha’ is known as full 
visarga and half of this visarga is anusvdra or bindu (.). 

11. Vadya Tantra is not available now. 

12 . 'Vartamdne’ here means svarupaldbhadasdydrri i.e. in the state 
o one s reahzation of his essential nature. 

<5 1 • symbolizes a and visarga or Siva’s externalizing 

Sakti symbolizes ‘/la’. The body, prdna, etc. cannot bring about 
nfth ^ Peiception of objects by themselves. It is the energv 

fav '^Wch by enhving them enables them to 

have objective and subjective experience. 

nr.i H "°^-dualistic Saivagama all these powers are inter- 

Ln '^entity with Siva or Bhairava who is our 

own essential Self. Thus 

( 1 ) Atnma IS the power of assimilating the entire manifestation 
to the cit or the Divine Consciousness which is our essential Self. 

/o! power of discarding all sense of diversitv. 

(3 ) Mahimd is the acquisition of the sense of all-pervasiveness 
ol the Divine. 

(4) Prapti is the power of abiding in one’s own essential Self 

(5) Prakdmya is the power of viewing the variety of the world 
as the delightful play of the Divine. 


Abhinavagupta 


37 


(6) Vaiitva is unity-consciousness with all. 

(7) liimoa or iHtva is the power of abiding as the Divine 
Consciousness without interruption. 

( 8 ) Yatrakamadosdyitva is the power of developing iccha- 
sakti characteristic of Siva. 

14. Bhdvana in a general sense includes dhdrand (concentra¬ 
tion), dhydna (meditation), samddhi (absorption); in a specific 
sense, it means creative contemplation. 

15. Karma is one of the dnava updyas in which the aspirant 
contemplates over the body and the nervous system as an epitome 
of the cosmos. 

16. Somananda lived in Kashmir in the ninth century a.d. He 
WTote Sivadrsti, and a commentary on Paratrisika which is not 
available now. He was the great-grand-teacher of Abhinavagupta. 

17. The entire objective manifestation exists in anuttara as a 
form of Consciousness or vimaria. 

Text 

From tathdyena muttarena on p. 13, 1. 10 upto vijfidtamdtrem on 
p. 13,1. 17 


Translation 

(Now Abhinavagupta explains 'yena vijndtamdtrena’ of the first 
verse in different ways.) 

(First interpretation of ‘yena-vijndtamdtrena’) 

'Tena' means anuttarerta i.e. by which anuttara. 

Vijndta means vUesena jndtd i.e. distinctively known, very well 
known. 

Mdtrena —This consists of two words md+tra. Md means mdtrd 
i.e. mdnena or /framateana, meaning ‘by means of the knowledge 
(of the Self),’ tra means trdnam i.e. pdlanarri or protecting, nourish¬ 
ing, maintaining or patitva i.e. rulership, guardianship. 

So, trdnam means protection of the pramdtd (knower), pramdna 
(knowledge and means of knowledge), prameya (knowable object) 
and pramiti (right conception). So, mdtrd is one that protects or 
maintains by the knowledge of the essential Self pramdtd, pramdryi 
etc. Therefore, vijndtamdtrarri means ‘that muttara by which the 
above mdtrd is very well known’. 



38 


Pard-Tritikd-Vivarana 


(Second interpretation of vijndtamdtrena) 

That which is very well known i.e. known with firm conviction, 
IS already known. Being once already fully known {sakrd-vibhata- 
tmatvat) it is not to be known again. Jndtamdtram means already 
known as on object {jneyaikarupatvdt), for instance ajar, never a 
subject {na tu kaddcit jndtr-rupam). So, vijiidtamdtra means that 
wluch is already known as an object. Similarly, it also means 
mdyd wluch is known as an object bringing about diversity. 

Now, vi-jndtamdtram is that in which both the known {jfidtamd- 
tra) i.e. objects such as jar etc. and mdyd have ceased {‘vV in this 
context meaning ‘mgata\ i.e. ceased). Therefore, vi-jndtamdtrena 
IS that in which objects such as jar etc., are no longer objects 
but being identified with the subject appear as one’s own light, 
and where mdyd no longer prevails. 

Three ideas have been brought about in the above explanation; 

(1) It IS anuttma by means of wlrich is maintained that Self 

through which alone exist the pleasures of pramdtd, pramdna, 

pra^ya^A pram^t^. (2) The Self once recogni^ed one requires 

renlar ^^ough bhdvand etc. (3) The object cannot 

TrelaU L do not 

prevail is mjnatamdtra. 


lEXT 

From khe brahmam on p. 13, ]. 17 upto uktanayena on p. 18, 1.3. 

Translation 

-pi ^^^112-vagupta offers an explanation oi khecarisarnatd) 

who Sakti is khecari, 

who abiding ,n kha, i.o. brahma (i.e. cit) which i, identical with 
herself roams about i.e. functions in various ways {carati). This 
art in er universal aspect functions {carati) in three ways, 
he (as gocari) brings about a knowledge of objects, (as dikcari) 
ft such as grasping, relinquishing, etc., (as 

bhucart) exists in the form of objective existents Thus this 
ecan exists as gocan in the form of antahkarana (the inner psycliic 
apparatus), as dikcari in the form oibahiskarana (i.e. outer senses), 
as bhucan in the form of objective existents, as blue etc., or 
subjective existents as pleasure etc. 


Abhinavagupta 


39 


Similarly, in the individual aspects, the saktis that are known 
successively as vyomacari in the void (of consciousness) in which 
the distinction between subject and object has not yet appeared, 
as gocari in the form of antahkarana in which there is just ap* 
pearance of knowledge, as dikcari in the form of the outer senses 
suggesting tlie appearance of diversity in which state there is 
diversity of the knower from the knowable object, as bhncari in 
the form of bhdvas or existents in which there is preponderance of 
clear diversity in the objects, are in reality, according to the 
principle enunciated, non-distinct from khecari which abides in 
the essential nature i.e. anuttara. Thus that Sakti of the Supreme 
Lord is only one. As has been said, 

“His iaktis constitute the entire universe, and the great Lord 
is the possessor of all the Saktis,” Or according to another inter¬ 
pretation: “There is only one possessor of Sakti, viz., Mahesvara 
and the entire phenomenal manifestation is the varied form of 
His svatantrya fakti (sovereign autonomy).” Consequently she 
{jkhecari) is indicated in feminine gender. 

It would not be proper to have a fixed, regular order or sepa¬ 
rateness between khecari Sakti whose sphere is the self, gocari whose 
sphere is the antafikarana or mind, dikcari whose sphere is the 
senses and bhucari whose sphere is external objects, because in 
that case an intimate connexion between them would not be 
possible, and also because as completely separate firom khecari, 
they would not appear at all (merely through the activity of the 
senses). 

That very khecari is perceived separately (from the Divine) 
in the form of desire, anger, etc. However, the samatd or same¬ 
ness of khecari means the perception of her full divine nature 
everywhere (in Sabda or sound, rupa or form and colour, rasa 
or taste, gandha or smell, sparSa or contact) because of her being 
of the nature of perfect Bhairava. Even an iota of the ignorance 
of the nature of the integral anuttara amounts to a contrary state 
of the mind. It is this contrary state that constitutes transmigra- 
tory existence {sanisdra). 

In this state, there is active display of dnava mala bringing 
about as it does the sense of extreme smallness in oneself because of 
his considering himself as thoroughly imperfect, of mayiya mala 
which is due to perception of diversity which comes about 



40 


P a ra-Prisika -1 "ivarana 


because of the longing for making up (lit. filling) for the limitation 
caused by dnava mala, of karma mala which arises because of 
laying hold of the residual traces of good and e\ il actions done 
under the influence of ma\d. 

When owing to the absence of limitation, the aberration {vai- 
samja) of the modes of the mind caused by the non-recognition 
oi the essential nature ceases, the very states of anger, delusion, 
etc appear as only an expression of the consciousness of the 
perfect revered Lord Bhairava Himself. As revered Sommianda 
has said: Siva is that whose very nature consists in the expansion 
of His Saktis (Sivadrsti, HI, 94). Similarly, “Whether it is 
me state of pleasure .the expression onaf/oa) or of pain (the 

1 abide m all of them as the Supreme Siva” ^S.D. X’ll 105) 

scencenfm is steadiness through the efilore- 

^cenj;e of the essential nature by means of endurance” etc. (S.D., 

with'^the^I'^ of anger etc., exist Irecause of their identity 

the erv consciousness, otherwise 

"f”' ''' ‘"’Po»blc). The divine 

are like the ''"Jf*" carrying „ut the various play (ofUfe) 

amofg the™*: teT'*"’ '<> co-mining 

either of terr-Ki of innumerable sorts. They are 

priate nurn t>^"efi^cnt kinds arrayed for various appro- 

Jaro: r ve::ie'':f: 

and in the 

deities accoi Hint- t u • ’ worthy of worship as 

the family of re ^ M ^'^’i^ion as krtyd* etc. They constitute 
“One should a ha“ava. As has been said, beginning with: 

“Set are tl^e ""r Po- and in: 

and other gro“p': of 'tate^s”” 

If the ^’eal oature of these rays i.e. saklls is not realized, then 
conceaing {no adhatyah) the wondrous play of the divine Con¬ 
sciousness which remains without any differentiation even in 
the midst of differentiations {vikalpPpi nirvikalpaikasdram), they 
bring about the state oi pahis ^limited experients) by worldly 


Abhinavagupta 


41 


snare, by means of the multitude of various kinds of letters, by 
means of the ghoratari iaktis who carry on their sports (i.e. devata-- 
tmand) in the form of various kinds of concepts {pikalparupend) 
by entering them (i.e. the limited experients) in .the form of fear 
arising from doubt. 

As has been said in the following lines: 

''''Mahdghoras are the deities of the pithas who delude people 
constantly”, and in: “They push those limited experients down 
and down who are engrossed in objects of pleasure.” And also in: 

“Being deprived of his glory by kald^ he (the individual) 
becomes a victim of the group of powers arising from the multi¬ 
tude of words and thus he is.known as the bound one.” (Sp. K. 
Ill, 13). 

When their real nature is known, then these very mental 
states (such as anger, delusion, etc.) bring about, by the means 
referred to (viz. khecari-samatd) liberation in life itself. As has 
been said: 

“When, however, he is firmly rooted in that supreme spanda 
principle, then bringing the emergence and dissolution of the 
puryastaka entirely under his control, he becomes the real enjoyer 
and thenceforth the lord of the collective whole of the iaktis,^^ 
Sp. K. Ill, 15). 

This is what is meant by the knowledge of their (i.e. the states 
of desire, anger etc.) real nature. These states of anger, etc., 
at the time of their arising are of the form of nirnikalpa i.e. they 
are sheer energy of the divine. 

So even when an aberrant thought-construct {pikalpd) (such 
as kdma or krodha) arises (which at the time of arising is non- 
aberrant) and is influenced by the varied words which are the 
outcome of the multitude of letters, it is not united with the 
group of the iaktis associated with the multitude of the letters 
so that it cannot annul the yogi’s nature determined by his 
earlier state of nirvikalpa. The thought-constructs are not entirely 
detached from the indeterminate state of consciousness {nirvi-- 
kalpa) which is only another kind of vikalpa or thought. It is 
only the indeterminate consciousness {nirvikalpa) which by the 
power of its autonomy {smtantryd) differentiates from itself the 
various entities {bhdvas) from wliich are derived the differences 
of the gross elements {labdhabheda^bhiitddi) known as vijndna^ 



42 Para-TrUika-Vivarana 

cakra and is thus the master or regulator of it (i.c. the vijndna- 
cakra). 

Therefore, homogeneousness {sdmya or samatd) of tire khecari- 
iakti constitutes liberation. Tliis homogeneousness (sameness) 
of the khecari iakti is due to the awareness of the essential nature 
of the anullara (i.e. the unsurpassable Absolute Reality) which is 
constantly present and which arises from the bliss of the recogni¬ 
tion of the completion of the union of the divine Sakti with Siva, 
and acquires stability by the realization of the consciousness 
of bliss of both {ubhayavimar^anandarudhi). 

Siva intent on creativity in the form of expansion by means of 
the energy of the great mantra of the Supreme primal word, viz. 
the perfect I. in unionwitli Sakti, in whojn the urge for expansion 
is implicit, and in whom abounds the bloom of the compactness 
of their energy, becomes engaged in the act of creative expansion.® 

Now whatever enters the inner psychic apparatus or the outer 
senses of all beings, that abides as sentient life-energy {cetanaru- 
penaprdndtmand) in the middle channel i.e., susumnd whose main 
characteristic is to enliven all the parts of the body. That life- 
energy is said to be ''ojas' (vital lustre), that is then diffused 
as an enlivening factor in the form of common seminal energy 
iyirya') in all parts of the body.^ Then when an exciting visual 
or auditory perception enters the percepient, then on account of 
its exciting power, it fans the flame of passion in the form of the 
agitation of the seminal energy. 

As has been said; 

“By conversation or contact with the body etc.” 

Of the form, sound etc., even a single one, because of its being 
made powerful by the augmented vigour referred to previously, 
can bring about the excitement of the senses pertaining to all 
other objects also. Since every thing is an epitome of all things 
for all people, even memory or idea of a thing can surely bring 
about agitation because of the excitement of innumerable kinds 
of experiences like sound etc. lying subconsciously in the omni¬ 
farious mind. Only well-developed seminal energy (virya) con¬ 
taining the quintessence of all experiences {paripusta-sarvamaya- 
mahdvityameva) can bring about full development and endow one 
with the power of procreation (^pusti^srstikdri^^ not its immature 
state (apurnam) as in the case of a child, or its diminished state 


Abhinavagupta 


43 


(ksinam ) as in the case of an old man. When the seminal energy 
that has been lying within and identical with one’s Self in a 
placid state {svamayatvena abhinnasyapi) is agitated {piksobha^ 
i.e. when it is in an active state, then the source of its pleasure 
is the Supreme I-consciousness full of creative pulsation, beyond 
the range of space and time {adeiakdlakalitaspandamayamahavima- 
ria-rupameva) ^ of the nature of perfect Bhairava-consciousness, 
the absolute sovereignty, full of the power of bliss. 

Even a (beautiful) figure brought into prominence by the 
meeting of two eyes affords delight only by the device of its union® 
with the mighty seminal energy {mahdvisarga-viilesana*-yuktyd) 
which stirs up the energy of the eyes {tadviryaksobhdtmakd) \ such 
is also the case when the ears hear a sweet song. 

In the case of other sense-organs also, the perception by itself 
(i.e. without its union with the seminal energy) cannot acquire 
full expansion because of the springing up of energy only in the 
sense-organ itself {svdtmani eva ucchalandt). 

So in the case of those in whom the seminal energy has not 
developed {tadvirya^anupabrrrihitdndm^y in whom the pleasure of 
love that excites the seminal energy as in other cases, is absent, 
who are like stone, to whom the beautiful figure of a charming 
young woman with large and handsome hips, with face moving to 
and fro and with sweet, soft and melodious song cannot give full 
delight. To the extent to which an object cannot bring about full 
excitement to that extent it can provide only limited delight. If 
there is complete absence of delight, it only spells insentiency. 
Engrossment in a profuse delight alone excites the seminal energy 
and that alone signifies a taste for beautiful things {sahrdayatd). 
Excessive delight is possible only to those whose heart is expanded 
by seminal energy which has the boundless capacity to 
strengthen sensibility and which is established in them by 
repeated association with objects of enjoyment. 

In grief also, there is the same wondrous experience of delight 
(to those who have khecari-sdmya) , Whatever pleasure is derived 
from one’s wife and son, the pleasure which is animated by semi¬ 
nal energy, and which abides in the heart {antarvyavasthitam)^ 


*Vi^le^a(ia in this context means not separation but union: vUe^eiia ^lesa(iain 
i.e. uniting in a definite characteristic way. 



44 


Para-Trifikd- Vivarana 


when contrary to ail anticipation {bhdvana-asadria) there is an 
apprehension of the loss of the loved one aroused by tears and 
shrieks, that very pleasure becomes the cause of grief {ksobhdtma- 
kam) and when that grief reaches its climax {vikdsam dpannam) 
and one thinks that that pleasure will not be experienced any 
longer, then owing to despair {tioiTctpeksya-vasa') the nature of 
that grief is suddenly turned into distinct joy (camatkriydtma) 
'owing to the expansion of the essential nature or khecari-sdmya), 
so it has been said: 

“Even in grief, by the expansion of the essential nature etc ” 
S.D. V,9). 


^Vhen there is the dissolution oS: prana and apdna (marudddi), 
in susumnd which, as the central channel, is full of the storage of 
the eneig^ of all the senses, then one s consciousness gets entry 
into that stage of the great central susumnd channel where it 
acquires union with the pulsation of one’s Sakti {nijasakti-ksobha- 
tadatmyam), then all sense of duality dissolves, and there is the 
perfect I-consciousness generated by the abundance of the 
perfection of one’s own inherent Sakti. Then by one’s entry into 
the union of Siva and Sakti {rudraydmalayogdnupravesena) which 
consists m the bliss of their essential nature of manifestation and 
by one s complete integration {vUlesana) with the expansive flow 
o the energy of the great mantra of perfect I-consciousness, there 
IS the manifestation of the akula or amittara fabsolute) Bhairava- 
nature rvhich is beyond all differentiation {nistaranga), unalter¬ 
able and eternal {dhruvapaddtmaka). 

In the case of both sexes sustained by the buoyancy of their 
serninal energy-, the inwardly felt joy of orgasm {antaksparia 
suktiam) in the central channel induced by the excitement of the 
seminal energy intent on oozing out at the moment of thrill (kam- 
pa-ale sakalavirya-ksobhojjigamisdtmakam) is a matter of personal 
experience to every one. This joy is not simply dependent on the 
body which is merely a fabricated thing. If at such a moment it 
selves as a token of remembrance of the inherent delight of the 
Divine Self {tadabhijndnopadesadvdrena) (i.e. if at such a moment 
one realizes khecari-sdmya), one’s consciousness gets entry in the 
eternal, unalterable state {dhruvapade) that it realized by means of 
the harmonious union (viUesana) with the expansive energy of 
the perfect I-consciousness which constitutes the venerable 


Abhinavagupta 


45 


Supreme Divine Sakti {parabhaftarikdrupe) who is an expression 
of the absolutely free manifestation of the bliss of the union of Siva 
and Sakti denoting the Supreme Brahman. It will be said later 
that ‘one should worship the creative aspect of the perfect I- 
consciousness' (P.T., Verse 29b). 

It is rightly said, “As the great banyan tree lies only in the 
form of potency in the seed, even so the entire universe with all 
the mobile and immobile beings lies as a potency in the heart of 
the Supreme” (P.T. V^’erse 24). 

Similarly, “This is the achievement of the reward of mantra. 
This is the union of Siva and Sakti. By the practice of this, one 
achieves the power of omniscience.” (P.T. Verse 35). 

At another place also, it has been said: 

“O goddess, even in the absence of a woman, there is a flood 
of delight, simply by the intensive recollection of sexual pleasure 
in the form of kissing (lit. licking), embracing, pressing etc.” 
(V. Bh. Verse 70). 

The above has been said in the following sense: 

Even when the contact with a woman is intensely remembered, 
that is reflected in the sexual organ {tatsparia-ksetre) and in the 
central channel which is the channel pertaining to the natural, 
supreme Sakti {madhyama-akrtrima-pardtmaka-iaktindlikdpratibim- 
bitah). Then even in the absence of contact with an actual 
woman [tanmukhyaSdktasparsdbhdve'pi) the intensive memory ot 
the contact excites the seminal energy pertaining to contact 
with women which lies in it (in the central channel). In this 
connection, it has been said, “At the time of sexual intercourse 
with a woman, complete union with her is brought about by the 
excitement which terminates in the delight of orgasm. Tliis only 
betokens the delight of Brahman which in other words is that 
of one’s own self.” (V.Bh. \ erse 69). 

Further, ‘‘By love, one should understand the achievement 
pertaining to Kula.” 

The eminent, venerable \\asa has also said: 

“Every womb is my great Sakti {mahat-brahma). I deposit the 
semen in it. From that occurs the birth of all beings, O son of 
Bharata.” (Bh. G. XI^^ 3). 

The venerable Somananda also says in his commentary ^on 
Paratrisika): 



46 


Para- Triiikd- Vivarana 


“The question of the Devi in amorous union with Bhairava 
though pertaining to para-sambandha^ was put to Bhairava from 
the standpoint of mahaP^ and antardla}^ sambandha in complete 
harmony with parasambandhay 

Enough of this long introduction to the esoteric teachings of 
Trika-scripture. So, according to the principle set forth above, 
this is what is meant by the first verse, that it is anuttara which 
gives kaulikasiddhi and which if understood brings about khecari- 
sdmya. 

Notes 

1. The activities of the senses as they occur are known as 
indriya vrtti and lead only to worldly activities, but if they are 
given a turn towards higher consciousness, they are transformed 
into indriya-iakti and are known as karane^vari^ marici-cakra^ etc. 

2. Uccdtana and mdrana\ Employment of a mantra by which a 
person is completely distracted is known as uccdtana and a mantra 
for killing a person is known as mdrana mantra. 

3. This is a system of Tantra teaching dvaitddvaita. 

4. Krtya is a goddess with whose help tantrikas destroy the 
enemies. 

5. Raid here means the sakti of letters. 

6. This cryptic sentence of Abhinavagupta defies translation. 
The following ideas are involved in this sentence 

(1) Siva is of the nature of ‘sdmdnya-prakdia-spandana i.e, 
is full of the pulsation of general creativity. 

(2) Sakti is of the nature of stimulating the general potential 
creativity of Siva into miesa-vimar^a-maya spandana i.e. into 
specific manifestation of §abda or sound, rtipa or form and 
colour, roja or flavour, sparia or touch, gandha or smell. 

Therefore the union of both is a sine qua non of the rich variety 
of manifestation. 

(3) This union bespeaks the expansion of ‘a’ kald oianuttara. 
The first stage is the Mnta-virya or only prakdsa of Siva. Second 
is the stage of vimarsa or rich variety of manifestation. 

(4) The Absolute is androgynous in nature. The male 
principle is represented by Siva and the female principle is 
represented by Sakti. It is out of the union of the two that 
there is manifestation. 


Abhinavagupta 


47 


7. This means that it contains the ojas or vital lustre of ^abda 
(sound), rupa (form), rasa (savour), gandha (smell), sparia 
(touch). 

8. ViJlesana here means vUesena Jlesah, definite junction or 
union. Mahdvisarga-^viilesana is a technical word of the system 
which means that all joy arises by union with the perfect 
I-consciousness. 

9. Para sambandha or the relation between the teacher and the 
taught is that in which the teacher arid the taught are both Siva. 

10. Mahat or mahdn sambandha is that in which the questioner is 
Sadasiva and the answerer is Siva. 

11 . Antardla sambandha is that in which the questioner is Ananta- 
bhattaraka and the answerer is Sadasiva. 

Exposition 

There are four important points in the long commentary of A.G, 
on this verse, viz. (1) What does the dialogue between the De^d 
and Bhairava actually mean ? (2) The connotation of Anuttara^ 
(3) What is kaulika-siddhi? ^ (4) The concept of khecari-samatd. 

We may take up these points one by one. 

1. What does the dialogue between the Devi and Bhairava 
mean? ^Devi umcd! means, ‘The Devi said’ i.e. put a question, and 
Bhairava uvdca means ‘Bhairava answered’. Does this refer to 
some remote past in which there was a dialogue between the 
Devi and Bhairava? What does the past tense connote ? Who is 
the Devi? Who is Bhairava? 

A.G. says, ^^Paraiva ca samvit ^DevV ityucyate^\ The Devi is none 
other than the Supreme Divine Consciousness wliich is not an 
abstract idea but living, throbbing Conscious Power, or Energy 
(Parasakti), the Supreme Verbum (Paravak), constantly pulsat¬ 
ing as ‘I’ [aham vimaria). And the question is nothing but Self¬ 
reflection. As A.G. puts it, ^^Tatpasyanti-madhyamdtmikdsvdtmdnam 
eva vastutah parasamvidatmakam vimriatiJ*^ The Devi while appear¬ 
ing as paiyanti and madhyamd knows Herself to be the Supreme 
Consciousness. 

Who is the questioner? A.G. reveals the following answer: ^^Aham 
evasdpardvdgdevi-riipaiva sarva-vdcyavdcakdvibhaktatayd evam uvdca “I 
myself as the same Supreme Divine Speech-power undifferentiat¬ 
ed from all words {vdcaka) and their referents {vdcya) spoke thus.” 



48 


Pam-Trisika- {"ivarana 


A.G. says: Eoarn paramarthamayatvat paramesvarasya cittattvasya. 
yadeva avibhdg^na autavvastu sphuTitaiji^ tadeva pasyaiitibhuvi vavna- 
pada-vakya-vibhajayisaya pardmrstam, madhyamdpade ca bhedena 
sthitam vastupurvakam sampannam ydvat vaikharyantam ‘auuttaram 

kathatn’ ityddi bhinna-mdyiya-vama-pada-odkya-racandntnm. 

“So, the inner content i.e. question-answer which appears in 
the consciousness of the highest Lord in an undifferentiated wav 
because of its being the highest truth, is thought of, in the 
paiyantl stage, with a desire to put it in the apportionment of letter. 

^^d sentence, is posited, with a sense of separateness in the 
madhyamd stage, and is finally e.xpressed, in vaikhari stage, in 
mdylya form i.e. in gross speech consisting of letter, word and 
sentence.” 

At the/iara or highest stage, there is neither question nor answer. 
There is simply Truth. It is only when it is to Idc revealed that it 

assumes the form of question and answer and is expressed in 
words. 

Finally, A.G. sums up the issue in the following words: Etdva- 
deva atra tdiparyam—svdtmd sarvabhdvasvabhdvak svayamprakdJamdnak 
svatmdnam eoa svdtmdvibhinnena prasnaprativacanena prastr-prativaktr- 
svdtmamayena ahantayd camatkurvan vimrsati, 

‘This is all what is meant to be said here. Self who is the 
natural state of all existents, who is self-luminous, amusing Him- 
se with question-answer which is not different from Himself, 
an m which both the questioner (as Devi) and the ans%verer 
(as airava) are only Himself, enjoys self-reflection.” 

o the divine dialogue is, in the ultimate analysis, a spiritual 
mono ogue, a sort of self-reflection, self-recollection. 

This also solves the enigma of the past tense. At the pard or 
supreme level, there is the eternal Truth which is timeless. So 
ere is neither question nor answer, neither past nor present, nor 
uture. It IS only Reality shining in its own light. Reality, not 
static, but dynamic, pouring itself out {prasara, visarga) in mani- 
estation throbbing with self-expression. It is only when the 
Iruth of the pard level is to be described or revealed that it 
descends to the pasyantl level, embodies itself in the form of the 
Devi, and the divine dialogue starts. So ‘‘tivdca’ or reference to 
the past is logical, not chronological. 

2. I he connotation oi anullara. 


Abhinavagupla 


49 


A.G. has explained the concept of anuUara in sixteen ways from 
different points of view. In his Laghuvrtti, A.G. gives the gist 
of the connotation of anuttara which covers all points of view. 

Uttar am utkrstam uparioarti, tacca ja^apeksayd grahakarupam. Ta^a 
tu ciddtmanah svaprakdSasya na grdhakdntaram astiti anuttarataam. 
Tena amttararji sarrimdrupam soda, sarvatrdvabhdsitani purodparade§a- 
kdlavihinam anapahnvaniyam” (L.V., pp. 1-2). 

Uttar am means higher, superior. In comparison to the insen¬ 
tient, it is the subject or experient. Hence uttaram means 
higher, superior. Since, of the self-luminous Consciousness, there 
is no other experient, since it is the universal Experient, therefore, 
is it anuttara. Therefore, anuttara is the supreme Consciousness, 
eternal, omnipresent, beyond time and space, undeniable 
Reality.” 

3. Kaulika-siddhi'. 

A.G. interprets kaulika-siddhi from two points of view, the 
exti'oversive and the introversive. 

From the extroversive point of view, kaulika-siddhi means kuldt 
dgata siddhih', i.e. achievement of definite experience of objects 
like jar, a piece of cloth, etc., derived from kula. ^Kulcd means 
'prd^adehddifd prdna, body etc. So 'kaulikasiddhidarri' means 
prdtjMdehddeh dgatd siddhih bhedaprdndndrji nilasukhddtndrri niicayarupd 
tdni daddti iti, i.e. that which brings about definite and certain 
objective experience like blue and subjective experience like 
pleasure, through prdna, manas, body etc. (to the empirical 
experient). Does the mind-body complex bring about this 
experience by itself? No, the mind-body complex is only the 
medium. It is anuttara, the unsurpassable Reality that brings 
it about through the medium of mind-body. ^ Sarlrddayo hi jhagiti 
anuttara-dhruva-visarga-virydveiena akdlakalitena prdnadimadhyama- 
sopdndrohenaiva bhdvdndiri tathdtvaniicaya-rupdrri siddhirri vidadhate.” 
Indeed it is the body, mind, etc. which through the penetration 
in them of the energy of Siva and Sakti, the energy that is beyond 
the sphere of time, that mounts the intermediate stair of prdna 
etc., that brings about the success in the form of the definite 
perception of the existing entities.” 

So kaulika-siddhi is definite perception through tlie medium of 
kula or mind-body complex, brought about by anuttara. 

From the introversive point of view i.e. from the point of view 



50 


Pard-TrlHkd-Vivarana 


of the return movement, kaulika-siddhi means the following: ^kula^ 
means the totality of gross, subtle, and subtlest manifestation. 
This is only congealment of the Supreme Consciousness. ‘Kule 
bhavd kaidiki siddhh^ i.e. it is siddhi pertaining to the total com¬ 
plex of gross, subtle manifestation. Siddki here means ^Hathdtva- 
ddrdhyam panvrtya dnandarupam-hrdayasdabhdva-parasamviddlmaka'' 
sidavimar^atdddtmyam tdm siddhim daddti^ 

Siddhi or achievement is the acquisition of bliss by turning 
round to have a firm hold on that very principle, i.e., the Light of 
Universal Consciousness; in other words, identity with the perfect 
I-feeling of Siva who is the highest Consciousness and whose 
nature is spanda or the eternal expression of His delight in mani¬ 
festation. It is anuttara which brings about such achievement. 

4. The concept of: 

The main objective of Devi’s question is khecari-samatd. This 
IS the focal point round which the entire dialogue between the 
Devi and Bhairava revolves. 

This is a compound word, the components of which are (1) 
Ithecari and (2) samata. We have, therefore, to understand the 
connotation of these two words. Let us, first of all, take up the 
word khecan. ^Khe' is the locative case of kha which means sky, 

AU \ \ context, it means ^brahmafi^ (the 

Absolute) and ran means that which moves about. As A.G. puts 
1 , Ate brdimam abhedanipesthitm carati Hi khecari,'^ ‘‘khecari is that 
W 1C , while stationed in brahman or the Absolute in indistinguish- 
a e unity, rnoves about.” In other words, khecari is the dynamic 
ivme consciousness. It is this divine Consciousness-Power that 
ani estation appears in the form of the empirical experient, 
s e IS nown as vyomacari, in the form of the psychic 
apparatus, when she is known as gocari, in the form of the outer 
senses, when she is known as dikeari, in the form of the objective 
existents, when she is known as bhucari. 

At the empirical level, every experience, tvhether it is a matter 
o perception such as sound, form, savour, etc., or a subjective 
te o min > such as (passionate longing) or (wrath) 

appears as distinct in its own right, having nothing to do with 
t re Universal Consciousness. When it is viewed in this light, i-c-, 
as sometiing in its own right, clamouring imperiously for 


Abhinavagupta 

gratification then it is khccaTi-vdisamya i.e. contrary to the actual 
nature of khecari. 

When, however, all perceptions and subjective states of mind 
like kdma and krodha are regarded only as an expression of khecari 
or the Divine Consciousness, when they are viewed subspecie 
aeternitatisy then even these states throw back the mind of the 
aspirant in the sweet embrace of the Divine \ then they serve only 
as liaison between the human and divine consciousness. 

As A.G. puts it, ''Saiva khecari kama-krodhadirupataya vaisamyena 
laksyate\ tasydh samatdsarmtraivaparipurna-bhairavasvabhdvdt:^ 

“When kdma and krodha are viewed only as aberration of the 
mind, then they constitute khecari-vaisamya or heterogeneity of 
khecari. The samatd or homogeneousness of khecari consists in 
viewing every object and state as the nature of integral Bhairava. 

Again ^^svarupdparijhdnamayatadvaisamya-nivrttau maldbhdvdt krodha- 
mohddivrttayo hi paripurna-bhagavadbhairavabhattdrakasamviddtmikd eva,'" 
“The vaisamya or disparateness oi khecari is due to the ignorance 
of the essential nature of anuttara or the Absolute. When this 
Ignorance is removed, then all limitations of the empiiical con* 
sciousncss disappear and with the disappearance of these limita¬ 
tions, even krodha, rno/ia etc., appear as of the nature of the perfect 
divine Bhairava-consciousness.’ ’ 

By khecari-samatd, the aspirant feels divine Presence everywhere, 
in every object, in every state, even in passion and wiath. It is 
an attitude which has to be constantly maintained. His whole 
outlook on life is changed. 

In this context, A.G. examines the question of sex. Sex is 
usually considered to be only a biological phenomenon, only an 
animal instinct having nothing to do with the Divine, and is 
looked down upon with monkish disdain. A.G. turns his td?itric 
microscope upon the problem and examines it with shattering 
candidness. According to him, sex is only a microcosmic aspect 
of a macrocosmic divine creative energy. The thrill ot sex is only 
a pale reproduction of the thrill of this divine creative energy. 
The divine creative energy radiates from the union of Siva and 
Sakti. It has to be borne in mind that Siva and Sakti are not 
two separate realities, but only aspects, the prakd§a and oimarsa 
aspect of one Reality, and their union is a sort of hermaphroditic 
or androgynous union. 


52 


Pard- TriJikd- Vivarana 


In the mammalian kingdom, energy is stored in the central 
channel of the spinal column which is the generating, storing as 
well as the distributing centre. According to A.G. whatever is 
taken in, whether in the form of food or perception (e.g. sound, 
visual awareness of form, savour, contact, etc.) is converted 
first m the central channel in the form oi ojas (vital energy); 
then this Ojas is converted into seminal energy {virja) wlfich 
permeates the whole body. All reproductive and creative func¬ 
tions are performed by tliis energy. Whether it is the enjoy ment 
of good food, beautiful scenery, sweet music, entrancing poem, 
the embrace of a dear one, everywhere it is this energ>' that is at 
play. It IS the representative of the divine energy {khecari) on the 
physical plane. Even passion, anger, grief, owe their fife to that 
divine energy. When that energy is used as a distinct form of 
mere physical, chemical, biological or psychic energy, then it is 
Uiecan-vaisamya, the heterogeneity, the disparateness of khecari. 

When everything is viewed and used as a form of divine 
energy, as 

A motion and spirit that impels 

All thinking things, all objects of all thoughts 

And rolls through all things 


Thk il'' it is homogeneousness oi khecari. 

^''"^tation, liberation from the octopus- 
iiKe nold of the sensuous life. ^ 

^’^^^t^ra-svardpaparijndnameva 
iadnar^d7um“'' ' ubhayavimar- 

“Homogeneousness of the khecari-iakli constitutes liberation. 
IS homogeneousness of the khecari-sakti is due to the awareness 
he essential nature ot the amitlara which is constantly present 
and which arises from the bliss of the recognition of the comple¬ 
tion of the union of the divine Sakti with Siva.” It is not simplv 
the knowledge of energy qua energy that brings about liberation, 
but the constant awareness of the energy in close embrace wdth 
the Divine that brings about the miracle. 

‘ ‘ Anumdtramapi aoikaldnuttara-soarupdparijndnameoa cittavrttmdni 

vaisamyam, Sa eva ca samsdrah7 


Abhinavagupta 

“Even an iota of the ignorance of the nature of the integral 
anuttara amounts to a contrary state of the mind. It is this con¬ 
trary state that constitutes transmigratory existence.” 

How does khecari-samya bring about liberation? The answer is 
“by transformation of the mind.” Khecari-samya does not mean 
locking oneself up in a room and meditating for a few minutes. 
It means awareness of the Divine every minute in the hum-drum 
routine of life. When the divine Presence is felt constantly whether 
one is eating, drinking, sleeping or looking into office files, when 
the whole life becomes yoga, then is it khecari-samya. Then the 
mind of the aspirant is completely transformed. Khecari-samya is 
that wonderful alchemy which transmutes the gross psychic 
element of the aspirant into the solid gold of divine consciousness. 
There ensues the miracle of the dissolution of the human con¬ 
sciousness into the divine consciousness. Thenceforth, it is not 
he that lives, but it is his Lord that lives in him. In his L.V., 
A.G. interprets khecari-samata as avikalpatvam, purnatvam and devi- 
rupatvam, as consciousness free of thought-construct, integral 
and divine. 


Text 

ETAD GUHYA^I MAHAGUHYAM KATHAYASVA 
MAMA PRABHO 

Translation 

“Tell me this secret, this greatest secret, O Lord who are my 
very Self {mama sva)’' or: “Tell me {kathayasva), O my Lord 
{mama prabho) this truth which, though largely unhidden {mahd 
agufyatji), yet remains a secret.” 

Commentary 

Text 

From guhyarn aprakafatoat on p. 18,1. 5 upto tasya amantra^amat- 
mana eva on page 20,1.19. 

Translation 

This is a secret mystery, because of its not being evident for 
though it abides in guhS (cavern) or mSya in which the essential 
nature remains unknown, it is not evident.^ Moreover, it is 



54 


Para- Trisikd-Vivarana 


unhidderij for it is known to everyone as the source of 
delight, (In its ultimate analysis), it is the goddess hddhavidya- 
herself who abides undivided in the different states of knower 
(subject), knowledge, and knowable (object). The three-corner¬ 
ed one,® however, becomes in the state of mdyd, percipient of 
differentiation which is excessively reflected therein. Aldyd also, 
being the source of the emanation of the universe, is actually 
divine knowledge {^uddhavidjd or Hvavidyd) itself. Therefore, 
according to the principle enunciated, this Suddhavidyd or di\4ne 
knowledge, when not known in this aspect, is called mahdguhd* 
(the great cavern), because of her being three-cornered in the 
form of knower etc. (that appear as different) on account of her 
exalted state of nondifferentiation being concealed from view. 
In the Trika Sastra,s she alone (viz. iuddhavidya mdyd) is, actually 
the object of worship as the three-cornered divinity. 

It has been (rightly) said: 

“She is the three-cornered great spiritual truth {mahd-vidyd) 
of the three aspects (Siva, Sakti and nara), the abode of all joy 
(whether external or cidananda), the substratum of universal ex¬ 
pansion i.e. both subjective and objective {visargapadam). There- 
ore, she should be w'orshipped in all the aspects of pramdtd 
K^nowev), pramdna (knowledge and means of knowledo-e) and 
(objects of knowledge). Similarly, “The one divine Light 
who permeates in pramdna, prameya (artha) and pramdtd never 
sets i.e. IS ever present.” 


Now in this great cavern of AIdjd whose heart is full of pure 

ivine wisdom (Suddhavidya) which is the vast creative movement, 
t e origin of the emergence of the entire universe, the return 
movernent in the form of ma-ha-a that occurs by its own inherent 
ynamism of delight is, indeed, a great secret. By means of this 
secret It IS mcended to indicate that there is a return movement 
rom objective manifestation indicated by ^ma' {nara) and ‘ha' 
{iakti) towards the essential nature (of the Self) which ends in 
the repose of Self-consciousness which signifies divine Fieedom 
or in other w'ords uninterrupted Bhairava-Consciousness indica¬ 
ted by a'. Of manifestation, the delightful form of the energy 
of the natural, innate mantra known as para vdk (the Supreme 
divine utterance) is I (akam). As has been said: 

The repose of all manifested phenomena in the Self is said 


Abhinavagupta 


55 


to be I-consciousness ” (APS 22) i.e. the real I-feelmg is that 
in which in the process of withdrawal, all external objects like 
jar, cloths etc., being withdrawn from their manifoldness come to 
rest or final repose in their essential, uninterrupted anuttara 
aspect. This anuttara aspect is the real I-feeling {aham-bhava). 

This is a secret, a great mystery. 

In the process of expansion, the changeless, unsurpassable, 
eternal, reposeful venerable Bhairava, is of the form ‘a’ wluch is 
the natural, primal sound, the Ufe of the entire range of letter- 
energies {sakalakaldjala-jimnabhutah). He in the process of ex- 
pansion assumes the ‘ha' form (the symbol ofSakti), for expansion 
(visarga) is of the form o(‘ka' i.e. Kun(Jalini» Sakti, and then he 
expands into a dot symbolizing objective phenomena {nara 
rupena) and indicative of the identity of the entire exp^sion of 
Sakti^ (i.e. the entire manifestation) with Bhairava. (Thus the 
expansion is in the form of aham or I. After this A.G. describ^ 
the return movement of manifestation in the form of ma-ha-a); 
Similarly, the lowest part or the last phase of objective mani¬ 
festation {rp. or nara) with its three powers* whose life consists 
of the trident of the para, parapard and apard Sakti, in its return 
movement through its union (viSlefana) with that visarga, viz. 
‘ha' Sakti, gets its entree into anuttara, i.e. ‘a' which is the funda¬ 
mental unalterable stage. This will be clarified proximately. 

Thus there is a-ha-rp in expansion and ma-ha-a in withdrawal 
or return movement. 

(A.G. now sums up the mystery of mahdguhya:) 

In the ma-ha {mahe i.e. in the great ReaUty) which is the 
highest bliss as described earlier, that which is ‘a' according to 
the previously described principle, that ‘o’ is the mysterious secret. 
This is the great secret, this is the source of the emergence of the 
universe. Also by the delight emanating fi:om the union of the 
two (viz. Siva and Sakti), it is clearly manifest {aguhya) inasmuch 

as it is the delight of all.® 

(Now A.G. interprets sva mama prabho:) 

‘Sva mama' means ‘my very self’. ‘Prabho' is a form of address 
and means, by bringing about such wonderful manifoldness, 
you are indeed capable of appearing in any form. A form of 
address connotes the face-to-face presence of the addressed one 
towards the addressor or his identity with him. So, it has a 



5G 

Pa Ta-Triiikd- Vi va ran a 

greater connotation than an ordinary noun. As has been said 
“An address has a greater connotation than a mere noun.” ’l 
have conclusively proved it in my ‘Sri Purvapancika’.Jo 

Etat kathaya' or ‘tell me this’ means that though this truth 
IS undifferentiated in the form of the Primal Creative Sound 
iparavak), yet kindly put it in a series of well-knit sentences in the 
Stage ol pasyanti^ etc. As has been said earlier, 

“The Lord Himself assunung the role of teacher as Siva and 
disciple as Sadasiv^a etc.” 

It has been decisively shown earlier that there is identitv liet- 
ween venerable para and pasyanti etc. 

Jhe ^vord ‘mine’ indicates an object {idambhava) related to an 
individual subject {pratyagatma-sambandhitvasya) . The secret thnt 
.s .mplid, i„ Ais ,elation is .ha, i, really speaking 

ioa ■ of the idea of appear-’ 

rel'Jon" ^ ^^°^tits to its 

Self Th essential nature of the 

At constitutes I-consciousness (aham-vimarsa) ” 

At another place also (it has been said): ‘ 

iar’ knowledge (ad/iyavasdya) in the form ‘this is a 

(realir'^'^u'^' ^limitation of name and form of the jar and is 

and Sovereign 

hines as the Self (i.e. as one with the self), and not anLt 

an object denoted by the word ‘this’ (I.P.K., I, 5, 20) ^ 

t has been rightly said by revered Somananda’ in his com 

mentary (onParatrisika): 

The vowel ‘a’ is pure Siva”. 

Jhe same idea has been described by me in detail. 

U ow A.G. gives another interpretation of ‘soa-mama’ takincr 
fs one „oyd, and by analysing i, into (ra-f-o+^a™) t 
K means susfhu i.e. duly, aptly, ‘a’ means avidyamdnam i e 
o present i.e. absent; ‘mama’ means vUvam i.e. the universe 
o soa-mama’ means to whom full of I-consciousness the universe 
las something apart) is simply nothing. The life of the possessive 


Abhinavagupta 


57 


case consists in denoting the possessed as something different. 
*Vifya* or the universe which is qualified by the possessive case 
‘mama’ i.e. ‘mine’ is not (denoted by ‘a’ in su-\-a+mama) any 
thing apart from *1’.^^ 

Though the yogis initiated according to other systems (i.e. 
Sahkhya-Yoga and Buddhism) or the vijhanakala and the pralaya- 
kevali (according to our own system) do not have the idea of 
‘mama’ in a certain state (e.g. in the state oisamadhi or absorption), 
yet there is the residual impression in them which has the ten¬ 
dency for difference; on awaking into their previous state, owing 
to the residual impression becoming active, it grows into I-con- 
sciousness identified with the body. In order to remove even the 
residual trace, the prefix ‘su’ has been used in the sense of ‘susthu’ 
(duly, aptly). 

As has been said by myself in a hymn: 

“That thought, viz. ‘Nothing is mine’ by which the senseless 
creatures are reduced to wretchedness incessantly, that very 
thought viz. ‘Nothing is mine’ means to me ‘I am everything’. 
Thus I have attained a lofty position”. 

(Another interpretation of ‘sva mama’ by means of a bahuvrihi 
compound from the point of view of Siva:) 

“Sva mama’ may be analysed into su-^ama-\-ma. ‘Su’ stands for 
‘iobhana’ i.e. excellent; ‘ama’ means knowledge, ‘ma’ means mdnam 
or realization. Now a bahuvrihi compound is thus formed out 
of these three words, ‘su—iobhanena amena mdnamyasya sa svamama’. 
Thus ‘svamama’ is one who, being His own Light itself, through 
excellent knowledge {iobhanena amena) has realization {mdnam 
i.e. avabodha) by means of the knowledge of non-dualism derived 
from the communication of the highest truth {amena i.e. para- 
mdrthopadeiddvaydimandjndnena)y knowledge which is free from the 
slightest trace of the foul stain of dualism {iobhanena dvaitakalaiik- 
dnkandkdlusyaleia-iunyena ). 

(From the point of view of Sakti:) 

Now, ‘amd’ is one who knows {amatiti). This is taken as one 
word and means the goddess Parasakti who moves freely in all 
fields of knowledge. This ‘amd’ is a-j-ma, ‘a’ has a negative force, 
meaning avidyamdna i.e. not present, and ‘ma’ means ‘mdna’ i.e. 
both knowledge or j'ndna and its absence i.e. ajndna, i.e. who is the 



58 


Para-TrUikd- Viva ram 


ever-present substratum of both^3 {nityoditatvat). That goddess is 
known as amd, 

(From the point of view of jiva or the empirical individual 
based on bahuvrihi compound within another bahuvrihi compound, 
e.g., 1. su§obhand amdyatra 2. tasydm sdyasya:) 

She is ‘su" i.e. excellent being ever present. (This gives the 
explanation of 'sda' + ‘ma\ Now remains ‘ina' of the phrase 
^svamama'). The remaining 'ma" implies mdyd\ Now, 'sva mama' 
means: “He in whom even in mdyd, i.e. even in the ordinary life of 
pramdna (knowledge) and prameya (i.e. object of knowledge) su 
amd i.e. the excellent amd as described is always present.” Thus 
there is a bahuvrihi compound within another bahuvrihi. What it 
means is that the Highest Lord ev^en in the ordinary life consistin:^ 
of pramdna etc., is always endowed with His highest Sakti, being 
nondual. (Since there is no difference between the Devi and the 
Lord,) addressing the Lord means addressing Herself. 

Notes 

1. In his L.V., A.G. says, nanu grdhakarupam sarvasya lirdaye 
sphurati tatra kim prasncna. Satyarn sphuritamapi na tattvato hrdayatV 
^amibhutam, hrdayati^amibhdvBiia vind bhdvamapyablidvcna rathyd^amc 
tTfiaparnddivat. ’ ’ 

‘'Well, does not Reality shine as the perceiving Experient in 
the heart of all? Then what is the relevance of a question about 
it ?” - ‘‘True”, says A.G. “though it shines in everyone’s heart, it 
is not intimately assimilated by the heart as existent. So though 
present, it is as if non-present, just as the grass and leaves on the 
path of someone who passes on in a chariot (though present 
are not noticed by him).” 

2. ^Suddhavidya' in this context does not mean the ^uddhavidyd 
tattva, the fifth category in manifestation. It means the pure, 
divine knowledge or iSivavidya. 

3. ^uddhavidya becomes trikond or three-cornered in manifesta¬ 
tion. The three corners are pramdtd^ pramdna and prameya^ i.e. 
the experient, experience and means of experience, and object 
of experience. Vide the illustration of trikona or tri§ula : 


Abhinavagupta 


59 


Trikona or the triangular form of manifestation 


Siva-vidya 

Siva 

Pramata or 

Experient Iccha or Will 


Pramana or 
Experience 

Sakti 

jn^a 



Prameya or 
object of 
experience 

Nara 

kriya 


Triiula or three-pronged Reality 


Sakti 

Pramana 

jnana 


Siva 

Pramata-Iccha 



Nara 

Prameya 

kriya 


Anuttara pervading all 


4. The triangular form oi mdyd is symbolic of cavern in which 
the secret of manifestation is hidden. It is also symbolic of the 
female or generative organ. Therefore, mdyd has been called 
^jagat-janana-bhuh\ ‘‘the source of the emanation of the universe.’* 



60 


Para- Trilika- Vivarana 


5. The Sastra is called/nXa, because it deals with three aspects 
of Reality, viz. pramata-pramana-prameya or icchd-jndna-kriya or 
§iva-Sakti-«flra or para-pardpara-apara. 

6. In Sarada script ‘ha' is written as j which resembles the 
form of Kundalini. 

7. In the process oisrsti or manifestation, ‘a’ symbolizing Siva 
expands into ‘h’ symbolizing ‘Sakti’, and terminates into m 
or the anvsvdra or dot over ‘ha' \vhich completes the process of the 
e.xpansion or manifestation. The ‘bindu' (dot) or anusvdra over 
‘ha' represents the fact that though Siva is manifested right upto 
the earth through Sakti, he is not divided thereby, he remains 
undivided; his expansion or manifestation in the form of Sakti 
remains identical with Him. 

8. The tlu-ee Saktis are icchd, jhdna and kriyd. ‘AharrC is sym¬ 
bolic of srni or manifestation, ma-ha-a is symbolic of samhdra or 
retraction; ‘c’indicates Siva, ‘ha' indicates :§akti and m indicates 
‘nara' i.e. manifestation right upto the earth. The return move¬ 
ment is from nara to Siva or ‘a'. 

9. A.G. interprets mahdguhya in three ways here: (1) Maha-\-a 
-\-guhyam. In the gi-eat bhssful manifestation, the presence of ‘a' 
o^anuttara in all its phases is a great mystery {guhya). (2) Mahd-\- 
guhyam: Siva-vidya in the form of Maya—the great cavern is the 
source of all manifestation. This is another great mystery. (3) 
Mahd+aguhyam: Though a great mysteiy, it is not entirely be¬ 
yond experience, for the identity experienced in the union of 
male and female and in the union of the experient and the 
experienced object is well known to everybody. 

10. This book is not available now. 

11. Any experience without its relation to an experient would 
be meaningless. 

}^‘ the possessive case denotes the possessed as some¬ 

thing different from the possessor as in the word ‘raja-prasada', 
the king’s palace, palace is something different from the king, but 
the universe is not anything different from Siva or I. 

13. This hints to that plane of Sakti where jnana, ajndna and 
their cessation—all abide in sarnvid or divine consciousness. 

Introduction to the second verse (p. 20-21) 

The next verse by gathering up the substance of the many 


Abhinavagupta 


61 


questions raised in one and a half verses above is meant to clench 
the issue. 


Text 

HRDAYASTHA TU YA SAKTIH 

KAULIKl KULANAYIKA/ 
tAm me KATHAYA DEVE6A 

YENA TRPTIM LABHAMYAHAM // 2 // 

Translation 

O Lord of all the gods, tell me about that kauliki iakti who re¬ 
sides in the heart (i.e. in consciousness), the Sakti who is the 
chief source of the entire manifestation and who is the presiding 
deity of all manifestation so that I may have full satisfaction. 

Commentary 

From sarvasya on p. 21,1. 1 upto uttarii ehu anutula on p. 23,1. 4. 

Translation 

(Interpretation of hrdayastha) 

Hfdayasthd=^hrt+aya+sthd, Hrt is the supreme conscious base 
of all objective experiences like blue etc., and subjective experi¬ 
ences like pleasure etc., and also of the empirical experients condi¬ 
tioned by the body, prana and buddhi. Ay a (plural of ay a) means 
knowledge of manifold, varied objects like jar, cloth etc., brought 
about by its own freedom. Sthd means this scintillating iakti 
abiding in them. So ^hrdayasthd^ means the scintillating Energy 
abiding in the knowledge of varied objects brought about by the 
supreme conscious base of all objective and subjective experience 
and experients by its own freedom. 

(Interpretation of Kulandyika ) 

(On the plane of aniittara) 

Kulandyikd means who is the presiding deity {ndyikd) of kula 
i.e. body, pleasure etc., in other words of objects, experience 

and experients. She is called ndyikd^ because it is she who brings 
into manifestation all objects of experience, experience and 
experients {iarira-prana-sukhadeh sphurattddayini)^ the vital energy- 



62 


Para- Tri§ikd- Vivarana 


of the collective whole of Brahml and other goddesses {hrahmyadi- 
devatacakrasya viryabhutd). On the plane of Sakti, she is the 
innermost core of the entire sensory and nervous system {nikhild- 
ksanddicakrasya madhya-madhyama-rupd)^ and on the plane of nara, 
she is the female and male generative organ, the source of all 
production {jananasthdna-kanxikd-liiigdtmd ). 

(The following is the interpretation of Kauliki :) 

1. Kauliki is one who though immanent in all manifestation 
(subjects and objects) is herself akula i.e. transcends it {kule-bhavd 
akularupd kauliki), 

2. Or one who abides in "kula^ but is 'akuW (i.e., sheer con¬ 
sciousness {cinmdtra) distinct from kula or manifestation) is '‘kauld! 
(i.e. Siva). She in whom this kaula or Siva abides in identical 
form is kauliki. The entire range of manifestation {kula) abides 
as such because of its being rooted in the light of akula (i.e. 
Siva). 

As has been said, 

“But by coming in contact with the power of the Self, an in¬ 
dividual becomes equal to that” (Sp. K. I. 8). 

Similarly: 

“Resorting to that power (of spandatattva)^ the divinities 
mantra etc. together with the sacred formulae which serve as 
their indicators, being endowed with the power of omniscience 
proceed to carry out their assigned functions towards the embo¬ 
died ones just as the senses of the embodied ones by resorting to 
the power of spanda proceed to carry out their (specific) functions” 
(Sp K. II, 1). 

Deveia is a form of address, meaning, the Lord of the gods, 
Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, etc. 

Instead oiHdm me kathaya\ the reading in revered Somananda’s 
commentary is Han me kathoya\ and he explains Ha€ as ‘therefore’ 
{tasmdt) or it may mean ‘Tell me that by wliich I may attain the 
satisfaction of the highest bliss i.e. I may enjoy the freedom deri¬ 
ved from the bliss of the highest non-dualism.” There is also 
another reading brajdmi instead of labhdmV, (The meaning in 
both readings is the same.) 

By the word ^aharrC or I in HabhdmyaharrC is always to be under¬ 
stood ‘the life and soul of all experients’. Having understood by 
the teaching the nature of I as described, one obtains the satis- 


Abhinavagiipta 

faction of knowing oneself as the Divine, the satisfaction of com¬ 
plete I-consciousness. This has already been made clear before. 
The revered Somananda has also interpreted ‘hrdaya" in liis com¬ 
mentary as : 

''Aya or advancing (of the mind) i.G.jiidna or knowledge in the 
hrt or the Supreme centre of consciousness.” 

**Abhinava has composed this commentary on the question 
(of the Devi) which elucidates the essence of Trika for cutting 
asunder inevitably {hathat) the knot of tn^d existing in the ether 
of the heart, for the mind which is engrossed {saktam) in des¬ 
troying for ever the mayic ignorance which is the root of all ill 
{aJiva)y the mind in which Siva has penetrated {Sivena niveiitam) 
and which is a thirst for drinking the nectar of the bliss of Siva. 

In order to open the entire treasure pertaining to the question, 
Bhairava said. The sense of the past tense in ‘said , has already 
been explained. What is the use of repeating it again? Bhairava 
is one who sustains and maintains the universe (indicated by 
"bha\ from the root 'bhr\ meaning to sustain, to maintain) and 
who sounds the great mantra of Self-consciousness, i.e. who has 
constantly the awareness of Self (indicated by ^rava or sound in 
Bhairava). Only here the predominance is that of Saktiman 
(i.e. Siva) from the point of view of the return movement (of 
His expansion) in the form of ma-]-ha-j^a which has already been 
described earlier.^ This will be made clearer further on. So, the 
following is the purport of the inti'oductory part of the dialogue. 

The initial spanda of Sanivit or divine Consciousness 

“The divine Supreme Consciousness-Power not different from 
Bhairava on the point of expansion according to Her essential 
nature, is said to be supreme icchdsakti (Voluntary Power). Hei 
actual expansion as jhdnasakti (cognitive power) assumes the 
pardpard or pasyanti^ form and as kriydsakti (conative power) the 
apard or madhyama^ form etc.** 

The nature of the question 

Now, the inquiry about the nature of pardsakti who expands in 
the form of the universe is said to be praSna or question. The 
Devi who is that very Sakti is the initiator of the question about 
Her {i,e. pardSakti). 

The consideration of the nature of tliis expansion is said to be 



64 


Pard-Trihka-Vivarana 

the most excellent organ of speech {para-vaktra) and that consists 
of both question and answer. 

That very organ of speech constitutes the return movement 
perUining to absorption beginning with ‘w’ i.e. the jiva (empirical 
individual) who has limited consciousness {aparasatnvitterarabhya) 
reaching the inner ^akti i.e. {pardpara-samnitti) ‘ha’ {antaslardm) 
and finally getting absorbed in the compact mass of bliss of the 
highest consciousness—or ‘a’ at once {parasamvid-ghand- 
nanda-samharakaranam muhuh ). 

whom the entire expansion oT the universe is in- 
volved inwardly abides as the perpetual responder. As the dual 
process of expansion and retraction is beyond time, therefore, 
this question-answer is the truth that is of uniform nature.^ Tliis 
is para sartibandha^ associated with anuttara. My revered guru 
Sambhunatha has already expounded it as the pith and core of 
Trika Sastra. 

Notes 

1. In srsti or expansion, it is Sakti who has the predominance, 
in sarnhdra, or the return movement, it is 3aktiman or Siva who 
has the predominance. 

2. P^yanli retmns the truth of unity of the/,«r5 iakti and con¬ 
tains the germ of diversity of the apard iakti. Hence she is called 
parapard i.e. pard+apard (the supreme cum non-supreme) 

3. Madhyamd is that stage of expression in wltich diversity has 

commenced in a subtle form. Hence she is called apard or non- 
supreme. 

4. includes in which there is complete diversity. 

5. There IS no difference between the question and answer at 
this stage. The question itself is the answer. In the empirical 
level of reahty, the questioner is one, the responder is another; 
the question occupies one moment of time, the answer occupies 
another. At the empirical level, there is succession in expanLn 
and retraction. At the met-empirical level, it is akrarria, succession¬ 
less, beyond time. That level is the domain of eternity—time¬ 
lessness. Hence there is no dualism of a questioner and a respon- 
der, a question and an answer. It is the heartbeat of Realitv 
sounding the eternal aye of creative activity. 

6. Parasambandha is the highest relationship between the ques- 


Abhinavagiipta 

tioner and the responder. In this, Siva Himself is both the 
questioner and the responder. 

There are other five kinds of relationship between the ques¬ 
tioner and the responder. They are given below: 

1. Mahan sattibandha. In this, the questioner is Sadafiva and 
the responder is Siva. 

2. Antardla sariibandha. In this, the questioner is Anantabhatta- 
raka, and the responder is Sadafiva. 

3. Divya satribandha. In tliis, the questioner is Nandakumara 
Rsi and the responder is Anantabhattaraka. 

4. Divyadivya sambandha. In this, the questioner is Sanatkumara 
Rsi and the responder is Nandi. 

5. Adivya sambandha. In this, both the questioner and the 
responder are human beings. 

Text 

SRNU DEVI MAHABHAGE 
uttarasyApyanuttaram / 3 / 

KAULIKO’YAM VIDHIRDEVI 

MAMA H^DVYOMNYAVASTHITAU / 

kathayAmi sureSAni 

SADYAH KAULIKASIDDHIDAM J 4 / 

Translation 

Listen, O most illustrious one, ‘the anuttara or the unsurpassable 
one is the unsurpassable even of the proximate one or anuttara 
means even the answer amounts to no answer’. The plan of crea¬ 
tion in accordance with kula abides in the ether of my heart. I 
am revealing unto you, O goddess, that which brings about 
spontaneous fulfilment pertaining to 

Commentary 

From devi iti...on p. 23,1. 11 upto ucyate on p. 24,1. 12. 

Translation 

The word ‘DevV has to be interpreted as has been done pre¬ 
viously. 



66 


P ^Td-Trihkd~Vivarana 


(First interpretation of yncihdbhd^d^ 

She who has the supreme one i.e. Siva as her aspect. 

(Second interpretation mahdbhdgd) 

derived in this context from the root 
bhaj which means to partake of, to adore. Here, it is taken in 
the latter sense. So mahdbhagd means ‘she who bein? adored 
according to the instruction described and about to be described 
gives the great divine power’. 

(Third interpretation of mahdbhdgd, the word ^bhaga' beino- 
used in the sense of portion) ° 

is known as the 

jeat one, a portion, a fraction. So mahdbhlgd means 

she of whom the celebrated great one, i.e. Anasrita Sivl is ins. a 

pomon for she enfolds within herself the initial one aL o^ the 
entire thirty-six categories. ^ ^ ^ 

(Fourth interpretation of mahdbhdgd) 

be!n°cMVZlZ f "“''t' m ’ 

oeen called a portion from the distributive or amitrt.v • * r 
vtew CiiMgataldpekgi’). I. divine Sak i herldf wT si 

sSl -- - - --d“^ = 

iJll" ^iffei-entiation {aparasthitau) i.e at the 

level of man where differentiation prevails she 
known as buddhi which in its subtle ^,11 ’ • is 

always the innate t a all-pervasive condition is 

(S.D.I, 26-27) universal consciousness of Siva.” 

(Fifth interpretation of mahdbhdgd) 

sufhx, the word bhaga means that which has difference or sena- 

TmLirb IT" -P--^--tities, ascertainment 

IS made by differentiating one thing from another. Thou-h 

pure ascertainment of objects {prdsdddtmaka-visaya-ni^cayo) i"e 

the indeterminate aspect {nirvikalpa) of buddhi does not^ touch 


Abhinavagupta 


67 


i.e. does not concern itself with the pleasant and unpleasant 
aspects of the different objects present in the world, yet that 
buddhi (in its d^tcvxmnBX^ or savikalpaka aspect) brings about the 
perception of objects as separate from one another. It is uni¬ 
versally admitted that there is a flow of the attribute o^sattva in the 
case of the pleasant states of buddhi^ for the pleasant states of 
buddhi are of the form of dharma (righteousness), aiivarya (power 
or sovereignty), (knowledge), and vairdgya (freedom from 

worldly desires). If one gets entrance into the deepest layer i.e. 
in the prathamdbhdsa or the initial, indeterminate state even in the 
pleasant aspect of buddhi^ then through that he will find himself 
perpetually in the domain of supreme bliss underlying that 
aspect. 


(Sixth interpretation of mahdbhdgd) 

Mahdbhdgd may be analyzed into maha-^d-\-bhdga. ^Maha^ 
modiXis jagaddnanda i.e. that bliss which is entirely uninterrupted, 
perfect, integral, independent, expression of divine Freedom; ‘a* 
means Hsat* or slight; ^bhdga* means fraction. So mahdbhdgd 
means the De\d of jagaddnanda^ bliss, only a slight fraction 
is available (to people). Whatever happiness there is in life, that 
is possible only by entering the Universal Creative Energy 
{visargaiaktau) who is the highest abode of the Supreme bliss. 
It appears in small limited measure (in life) only because of the 
visargaiakti not being realized in her internal essential aspect. 

Bhattanarayana has given expression to the same idea (in his 
Stavacintamani): 

“All the delight that is noticed in all the three worlds (viz. 
bhava, abhava and atibhava) is only a drop of whose delight, to that 
God, the ocean of delight do I bow.” (St. C. Verse 61). 

(Seventh interpretation mahdbhdgd) 

Mahdbhdga may be interpreted as ^ma-ha-a bhdgah yasydh sd 
mahdbhdgd^ i.e. she who betakes herself to that form which has 
been declared by the previous principle as ma-ha-a is mahd- 
bhagd. What is meant to be said is that the delight of the highest 
Lord which expands in the form of "^aharrC is the essential form of 
Sakti, and that is the nature of revered para. 



68 


Para- Triiikd-1 ^ivarana 


Commentary 

From’ ata eva on p. 24, 1.12 upto prasaktdnuprasaktyd on p. 25, 

1 . 21 . 


Translation 

Therefore that highest goddess hears everything. Abiding as 
she does in the form of the power of hearing, she has that sover¬ 
eign power {svdtantrya) which consists in effecting congruous and 
suitable connexion by blending all sound in a meaningful whole— 
the sound which is clear to the ear but is only a succession of a 
mass of confused vibrating syllables. Without this power of effect¬ 
ing congruous connexion, an experient though hearing parti¬ 
cular words lost in confused buzzing sound says, in common 
usage T am not hearing them’. 

An object of sense-perception which is merely confused buzzing 
sound without its being blended in a sensible whole is also said to 
be ‘heard’. This is the common usage. But in reality, the con¬ 
fused sound only enters the ear; it does not enable the listener 
to grasp the words denoted by the sound and therefoi'e it remains 
only a confused mass of sound {tatha bhavet), for Ijeing different 
from the words, it is merely buzzing sound. When it is intended 
to enunciate the words, then there cannot be the production of 
confused sound, for there is no ground for it. When there is the 
desire to speak sensibly, then there is the enunciation of clear 
words," and with the enunciation of clear words, there is no occa¬ 
sion for indistinct, confused sound of the same kind. Those verv 
words when they are not clearly enunciated and so cannot be 
knit into a meaningful whole are said to be mere confused sound. 
For one attentively intent on knitting the words in a sensible 
whole, there may be clear comprehension to some extent. There¬ 
fore in such a case, it is the congruous connexion of the words 
which can be of use. It is the goddess parasakli (the supreme 
creative power) who brings about the congruous connexion. 
It has been rightly said, 

“Mantra, Mantramahesvara etc. resorting to that power etc.” 
(Sp. K. II, 10). In fact “hears, sees, speaks, seizes” etc. are only 
aspects of the goddess alone. As has been said by the Divine in 
Vedanta: 

“That by wliich one (i.e. the experient) knows colour and form 


Abhinavagupta 


69 


(rupa), taste, smell, contact, sound, the pleasure of sexual inter¬ 
course is this Self alone. What remains in this world (which is 
not known by the Self)?” (Katha U. II, 3). 

Hearing does not mean simply lending the ear to some con¬ 
fused, loud utterance of words. Siva Himself thus laid down in 
Svacchanda Sastra on the occasion of the division ofjapa (repeat¬ 
ing a mantra in a munnuring tone): 

“That which is heard only within oneself is known asupairiht 
japa.” In this the Self alone hears in madhyama stage, not any¬ 
body else.’® This is what is said. 

When the organ of utterance {sth&na) and the mode of arti¬ 
culation (prayatna) are distinctly marked, then with the junction 
and separation of the teeth and the lips, even words uttered in 
very low tone may be audible to a person sitting very close and 
there would arise the contingency of the japa becoming saiabda 
i.e.japa with audible words. It has been said: 

“That which is audible to others is known as saSabda japa**. 
In iipdruiu japa {atra)^ there is no particular advantage even to a 
man who is sitting close by, for it will be inaudible to him. 
Another person may notice the movement of the tongue and the 
junction of the lips (of the performer of the japa) , yet he cannot hear 
him, for the words are not audible externally {vamasya bahirdtmald^ 
bhdbhdvdt)^ for the japa is being performed only in the madhyama 
stage. Only the performer can hear it {dtmand eva iravanam sydt). 

By the impact of air, clear words are effected, but the impact 
is not so strong as to make it audible externally. Even the move¬ 
ment of lips in this japa does not enter the stage of marked utter¬ 
ance of words, but is confined to itself till that japa lasts. If the 
movement of lips, hands, etc., occurring at that time (i.e. at the 
time oijapa) is stopped and in its place there is distinct articula¬ 
tion by means of the organs of utterance, and in the effectuation 
of words, if there is soft or loud production of sound in succession 
so as to be audible near or far, then it is, in every way, heard by 
others. Then it will be sound of the level of vaikhari. Enough of 
elaboration of this incidental reference. 

Notes 

1. Pardbhattdrikd is the very power of learning. She hears every¬ 
thing that is ever uttered in the universe. 



70 


Para- Trisikd- Vivaram 

2. Her sovereign power {svatantrya) consists in sankalandnu- 
sandhdna. Sankalana means effecting congruous and suitable 
connexion of distinct sounds and anusandhdna means blending 
them in a definite, meaningful whole. 

3. What is meant to be said is that in updmsu japa, even the 
aspirant carrying on the japa cannot hear the mantra with his 
physical ears. ‘He hears it within himself’ only means that he 
experiences the mantra as a spanda or throb of his self-experience. 

Exposition 

The Devi is none other but the Sakti of Bhairava Himself. 
A.G. gives seven reasons why the Devi is called mahdbhdgd. Now 
A.G. says that there is an esoteric meaning in asking her to hear 
She is the power of hearing itself. While others cannot make out 
anything from confused, buzzing sound even though it is heard 
by the ear, she can always make out the sense of all sound whether 
It IS clearly pronounced or is only indistinct, confused sound. 

Text 

From saiva parameyjari on p. 25, 1. 22 upto sfnu devi iti on p. 28, 

1 1 • 

Translation 

That very supreme goddess who hears everything has by the 
foiTO of address (viz.,‘ O goddess, listen’), clearly been indicated as 
J)akti Everything m the universe is of the form of warn, Sakti 
and Siva.i Therefore everything in the universe consists of the 
triad. That, which is only confined to itself (as an object), is 
insentient and comes chiefly under the category of nara, as Vor 
instance, ‘the jar is lying (on the ground).’ The above has refer¬ 
ence only to the third person (prafliama puriisa) which is left to 
be supplied after the first and second person (Sesa/t) 

That wliich appears even as ‘this’, when addressed, becomes 
completely enveloped with the I-feeling of the addresser. The 
‘this’ which is different from the addresser, when addressed as 
‘you’, becomes a form oV^aktV. In‘you are standing’ this is the 
meaning of the second person, and the principle of addressino- viz. 
as I am standing, even so this is standing. Ordinarily, the I 
{ahambhdva) of the other person is different from the T’ of the 


71 


Abhinavagtipla 

person who is to address, but in the process of addressing, the 
addressor assimilates the delightful autonomy of the addressed 
characterized by I-feeling to lus own, and considering it as iden¬ 
tical with the uninterrupted delight of his own I-feeUng starts 
addressing him. In this Ught, he is addressing him in the true 
sense of the second person. This sense in which the addressor and 
the addressed, though different, become one in the addressing is 
indicative of the pardpara goddess (whose characteristic is identity 
in diversity). 

(On the other hand) in the freedom of the uninterrupted de¬ 
light of I-consciousness completely independent of any reference 
to anything else, expressed in the form T am standing’, it is in 
every respect (sarvatkd) the revered para (highest) iaktP^ that is 
at work. In that lies the pre-eminence of the first person. As has 
been said, “Since I transcend the perishable and also the 
imperishable, therefore, am I known as the liighesti.e. as 

the first person.” (Bh. G. XV, 18). 

Here the verb ^asmV (am) has been used with reference to 1 , 
the first person, to indicate its pre-eminence over both the 

perishing and the imperishable. ^ ^ • , u 

Here in every case, it is not the limited I identified with the 
body that is referred to. The limited I (identified with the body) 
being an object of the senses is obviously incompatible with that 
(the real, unUmited I). Thus this (i.e. unlimited) I is of the 
nature of the self-luminous Siva. Therefore of the (universal, un¬ 
limited) Consciousness ijbodha) which is self-luminous, there is 
neither any diminution nor augmentation. Both diminution and 
augmentation being of the nature of aprakdSa cannot be an aspect 
of the Light of Consciousness (lit., cannot enter consciousness). 
The middle state which is only relative to the state of diminution 
and augmentation is also nothing. Therefore the notion of I 
which is inseparable from the universal consciousness of Siva {tad- 
bodhaoicchedarupa) and free from all relativity is not applicable to 
situations of augmentation, diminution, and the middle state bet¬ 
ween these indicated by thisness, i.e. objectivity and absence of 
olsjectivity (i.e. the state oUunjia or void) . The notion of you i.e. 
the second person which, though indicative of separateness, is 
actually similar to that of I. “Therefore both you and I are des¬ 
cribed as genderless” (i.e. they are used for both genders). The 



72 

Par d- Trisikd-- Vivarana 

accoidw'; 1"“’”*’“ > “"'i P>"al of these ,v„.ds 

en« ofX h ®e“" ““'’’"'■Mion or differ- 

ence of the body is appropriate from the point of view of f>ara 

para sakti in the dual and apara-sakti in the plural. The diffc/ence 

determined by the Sakti of the Divine Freedom i. vi !i 

°.”4es 

sages as w e two, you two, wc all, you all ’’ 

coSusTesr ^'^-^-ably applied to 

Everything is an epitome of all”. Accordino- t ei ■ 
versal principle, even L insentient thiid 1 

api) shedding their insentiency can become enft T! /'" 

ilTtalnr*!- t""^ o'" bhaLiti), for 

ed as second person, in ‘of mountains, I Z u^Z T ZZ 
person has been treated as the first person, in ‘I Caitra a i- 

ing t e first person has been treated as the third n 
second person . x,.- ^nud person. Ihe 

person which pertains to ^akti, can bv ci,„ i r ■ 

character aro.,;..^ r , . . ^ shedding its sakti 

. C) acquiie the aspect of the third person r ■ » 

in you whoso u -i i r ■ person, for instance, 

y wnose tear has vanished, are fortitude nit ti !- 

fortitude) itself’, ‘you’ not being used as a 7 r ^ 
appropriatelv Pirn * i u ^ r u , ^ of address has 

particular subsequent use of words like 
another per on b i f case of 

ofmra is faiT’ '"hich is characteristic 

racteristic of ^TTd also which is cha- 

of first person whi h p“ ' r ^«P^« 

dear friend '' characteristic of Siva, for instance, “O 

ed - - --p‘- 

its aspect'ofr; “ characteristic of Siva, shedding 

third Irson^h ^^e aspect of the 

of Jakfi. In tSlu w"'"'" '"Zi eharacteristic 

am I ” “O T» expressions. Who am I ?” “This one 

autonomv ^7 ^^e., the uninterrupted 

that ber ^ subdued, and it is chiefly the separate ‘this one’ 

character“tfooflt“'^"2- Zh " if separateness 

sue Ol apara sakti, in other words, nara rtipa or third 


Abhinavagupta 73 

person that becomes prominent. In O I’etc., Siva contacts the 
throb of pardpard iakti (i.e. enters the sphere of second person). 
But in such cases, the preceding state acquires the succeeding 
state without transgressing its previous nature.^ Thus the third 
person characteristic of nara can clearly mount to the stage of 
the second (the Sakti stage) and even to the first person (i.e. 
Siva stage) but the contrary course of mounting cannot be 
admissible.^ 

Each of tliis triad \vithout giving up its nature, becomes of three 
forms, viz. singular (Siva-AA^a), dual (Sakti-AA^oa) and plural 
{nara-bhdva). It has been said, 

“One thing becomes dual, and after becoming dual, it becomes 
plural.” Of one and the same thing, when it is only one, then it 
connotes the nature of Siva, since there is no other as counterpart. 
When there is a counterpart, then it is the nature of Sakti. In 
the case of many denoting difference, there is the nature of nara. 
Thus we have ^ghatah\ one jar denoting oneness, and thus Siva- 
bhdva^ ^ghatau\ two jars, denoting Sakti-AA 5 o< 2 , ‘^Aa/ 5 A’, many jars, 
denoting the aspect of nara. In a copulative compound {dvandva 
samdsa) in which the members, if uncompounded, would be in 
the same case and connected by the conjunction ‘and’, we have 
an example of many things forming a sort of unity, thus denoting 
Siva, e.g. ^ghafapatapdsdndh^ cloth, stones). In a verb also, 

e.g. ^tisthatV (one is standing or sitting) denotes Siva: HisthataK 
(two are standing or sitting) denotes iakti^ ^tisthantV (many are 
standing or sitting) denotes nara. In fact, the entire manifesta¬ 
tion is the expansion of kriyd§akti brought about by one alone (i.e. 
by Siva). As has been said: 

“By reducing the many (i.e. the nara-rupa and ^akti-rupa to 
one (i.e. Siva-rM/?a) who is there who will not be liberated from 
bondage?” 

Therefore, when the third person {nara)^ the second person 
(Sakti) and the first person (Siva) are used together, simultan¬ 
eously there is the absorption of the lower in the higher and higher, 
because it is the higher that contains the truth of the lower, e.g. 
in ‘ja ca tvam ca tisthathah (he and you are standing), the number 
of the verb ^sthd^ (to stand) is used in the second person which 
indicates that the third person {nara) has been absorbed in the 
second (Jakti). In ca tvarri ca aham ca tisthdmah* (he, you and 



74 


P (ira-TrUika-Vimrana 


I are standing), the verb ‘tisthdmalf which is the plural number 
of the verb in the first person has been used even for the third and 
the second person which is indicative of the fact that the third 
and second person are absoi'bed in the first. It is only this state 
of complete understanding, the essence of the residual traces 
of the innate, perfect I-consciousness which is followed bv the 
grammarians in their descriptive rules. Similarlv, even in local 
dialects,_e.g., the language (e.g. Pali) used by the Buddhists or 
used in Andhra or Dravidian region, this manner alone of speech 
and meaning (lit. e.xpressed by tvords) which originally follows 
the instinctive feeling of the heart, conve>s by its delio-htful 
impression this form (viz., the form of >iara, .'§akti and Siva') of 
understanding. 


As has been said by myself: 

“That is no speech which does not reach the heart directly.” 
o in every way, this kind of comprehension is innate. As has 

' and Siva (tair), there 

neitner word, nor meaning, nor mental movement ” In M ilinT 
vijayatantra also, it has been said: ’ 

the one Sakti of Siva (sambho/i §aktirekaiva Jdnkari) abides 
presiding over the entire class (of words, in first, second and 

III 34 ) ’ related unto you.” (M.V. 


In Tantrasamuccaya also, it is said: 

Tids universe is established always and is in every wav in- 

perlon Js-and'first 
^ dealings of worms and the all-knowin<r ” 

Dersnr/^' umverse consisting of the third, second and ffrst 
P on {nara-sakti-stvd(makam) has been explained accordino- to 
e caching of the traditional clear comprehension. This^all- 

pratipattikramah) con- 

hv manifested 

by the free will of the highest Lord. So enough of elaboration of a 

opic which can appeal to the hearts of only a few people who have 
received the teaching from a guru, tvho are of refined taste, who 
are well-read (lit., who have heard from the learned people a 
great deal), and who have been purified by the descent of the 
Supreme grace. So, ‘listen, O goddess’ has been explained. 


Abhinavagupta 


75 


Notes 

1. In the context of trika or triad, viz., Siva, Sakti and naray 
^nard* represents all objective phenomena from the earth up to 
m^di ‘Sakti’ represents Suddhavidya, Isvara, and Sadasiva, and 
‘Siva’ represents Siva and Sakti. 

2. In the first person, it is the pardiakti that is at work. From 
the point of view of the triad, first person is the state of Siva. In 
the second person, it is the pardpard §akti that is at work. So, the 
second person, from the stand-point of the triad is the state of 
sakti. In the third person, it is the apard iakti that is at work. So 
the third person from the standpoint of the triad is the state of 
nara. 

3. The meaning is that the Siva-aspect abides in the Sakti- 
aspect, and the Sakti-aspect abides in the warj-aspect. Thus the 
Siva-aspect pervades all of them. 

4. The nara-^Tupa first rises to the Sakti-rz7j&fl and then to Siva- 
rupa. It cannot rise to Siva-rwj&a, leaving aside the intervening 
Sakti-rwj&a. 


Exposition 

A.G. has tried to show that when Bhairava in the first person 
addresses the Devi in the second person, it should be understood 
that the Devi is not different from Bhairava. In order to prove 
this point, he has given a number of examples of the usage of 
speech in which the second person is assimilated to the first, and 
the third to the second. A.G. has been at pains to prove that th^se 
kinds of usages in speech in all languages are not a matter of 
accident or convention, but serve as a pointer to the metaphyseal 
truth, viz. that Siva and His Sakti are one, that just as in gi^am- 
mar there is first the singular number, then the dual and finally 
the plural, that just as in speech, there is firstly the first person, 
then the second and finally the third, even so in manifestation, 
the singular number and the first person are symbolic of Siva, the 
dual number and the second person are symbolic of Sakti and the 
plural number and third person are symbolic of nara or objective 
phenomena. Further, just as the third person has to surrender 
itself to the second, and the second to the first in order that they 
may be used together, so also the prameya (object) or nara has to 
surrender topramdna (knowledge) or Sakti, to be known, and 



76 


Par a-TrUikd- Vivarana 
fulfilment' ^o pramdta (knower) for its final 


Commentary 

From utlarasyapi on p. 28, i. 11 upto ityuktam on p. 33. 1. 21. 
Translation 

anIIwo“Bhai;\f'■ "" 

(Different senses of uttarasydpyanuttararn) 

1. As has been said before (viz., everything is the ejfitome of 
;> tile pro.ximate one {iillaramcJn) is also identical ivith the non- 
P oximate (anultara). It cannot exist otherwise. Therefore the 
also aside i.s characcr as p,,ai„.ase Iscc,;.*: 

is reads,‘ullarasyapi anultaranC. ^Uttarasya' 

in the se r" ^^<-^^1 

ofer^n i.e. ignoring or setting aside i.e. alisence 

the ^ o*’ dis- 1 -e.gard. .So \illarasyapi anuttaram' mav mean 

non character as proximate becomes 

difference (of the proximate one i.e. 

erence^V^''^'' ^^is character (of diff- 

As b.!v^ tmdifferentiatcd (i.e. anultara)d 

s been said in the following: 

^(This IS a difficult verse. The following is its prose order:) 

pare tdvat kartum na sakyaleySvat parah na atmi- 
diffe ' pare buddhahP’).” “Even the ascertainment of 

ibareT-^^ ^^"’"‘^^Pavasthd) cannot be made in the different objects 
assimil sakyale) so long as the .Supreme is not 

diffe- oneself {yavat parah na atmiknah), since the 

{pareT^ ipr^rah) is known (buddhah) only in the Supreme 

Suprem* different object has its raison d’etre only in the 

posterior. So ‘utlarasyapi anuttaram’ may 
answer ” 2 '"^'^ posterior part of the book cannot offer its 

3. Even of my answer given in the paSyanti stage which is the 
rst expansion of para, this anultara is the highest truth i.e. this 
non-answ'er {anultara) or silence is the highest truth. 


Abhinavagupta 


77 

4. £7«ammayalsomeanthephenomena— desirables,knowables. 

and actions—prompted by the trident, viz. iccha-Sakti, jnana-Sakti 
and knyd-iaktu Anuttara is that stage where all the above and 
uttara cease. 

What after all is that anuttara? The an<tw<-.. io 
from which proceeds kaulika vidhi\ Kaulika has been previously 
explained as ‘that which is of the nature oikula and akula?^-, vidhi 
means ‘the great manifestation’ {mahd^stiy or the tattvas from 
andSrita Siva upto iuddhanidya {iuddhadhna). ^Vidhi' is socalled 
because of its being executed. Now anuttara is that from which 
proceeds this ‘great manifestation’ i.e. mahdsrsfi* which enfolds 
within itself hundreds ofcrores of unlimited mdyiya (phenomenal) 
creations. As has been said, “That from which proceeds every¬ 
thing.” So, this universe consisting of cit-pramdtd i.e. Junya pramdtd, 
citta i.e. puiyasfaka pramdtd, prana i.e. prdi}apramdtd, deha i.e. deha- 
pramdtd (i.e. four kinds of experients), pleasure and pain i.e. 
subjective experiences, senses i.e. means of experience, the five 
elements and jar etc., i.e. subtle and g^oss objects of experience 
abide without difference in one, supreme, divine Consciousness 
as simply form of consciousness {bodhdtmakena rupena). Though 
the divine universal consciousness never ceases to exist, for it 
ceasing, there will be the contingency of universal darkness, yet 
there does not exist difference consisting of reciprocal absence 
(of objects), for all objects are omnifarious in that state (viSvdt- 
mdna eva bhdvdh). If all things were not situated in that universal 
Bhairava Consciousness, then even the initial indeterminate 
perception which is of use in urging the senses towards their ob¬ 
jects would not be there. Therefore, the entire multitude of exis- 
tents exists there, without the appearance of appropriate objecti¬ 
vity (lit., thisness), identically with I-consciousness only, void of 
all differentiation. There is absolutely no difference there what¬ 
soever. In that universal Bhairava consciousness, the entire mani¬ 
festation {kaulika vidhi) lies clearly {spastaf} san) at rest. 

All this (universe) consisting of thirty-six categories, though 
created by Siva who being of supreme Sakti, is of the nature of 
universal creative pulsation {sdmdnya spanda) rests in that consci¬ 
ousness itself in its own form which is predominantly iSakti i.e. 
characterized by particular creative pulsation {viiesa spanda).^ 
This is what is meant by the inherence of objects in their own 




7 8 Para- Trisikd- Vivarana 

nature which is consciousness. As has been said “In which all 
things exist.” 

This multitude of objects {tadetat) of the nature of Siva and 
Sakti, Siva whose characteristic is universal creative pulsation 
{sdmdnya spanda^) and Sakti whose characteristic is particular 
creative pulsation though only of one form {ekdtma- 

mapi) has been determined separately by the Lord only as an aid 
for teaching, but really speaking it is only one, viz. amittara who is 
the essence of the creative energy viz., the autonomous I- 
consciousness. 

What is the nature of that in which this process of creation 
(kaulika vidhi) is inherent? Bhairava says, “It inheres in the ether 
of my heart” {mama hrdaya-vyomni), Now heart {hrdaya) in this 
context means the receptacle of all the existents. 

Existents from blue etc. upto worms are, in their final analysis, 
simply nothing unless they rest in consciousness {cidanda-animsia- 
ndm). 'Blue’ etc. belong really to the experient. The essence 
of blue etc. consists in its being incorporated in uninterrupted 
I-consciousness, as in ‘Blue appears to me”. 

{^Mama hrdayavyomnV may be interpreted in many ways) 

First interpretation-. In ^mamahrdayavyoma\ ^hrdaya^ means ttie 
receptacle of innumerable objects like blue etc.; ^vyoma^ means 
that where the universe of particular objects {marnakdrdtmakam 
mivam) is 'vita!' i.e. is held wholly in an implicit manner in that 
ether which is devoid of all difference {^unyarupani), 

Second interpretation: 'Mama* means 'of the consciousness which 
expresses itself both in difference {apara-sarnvitti) and non¬ 
difference {para-samvitti) \ 'hrdayam! means the final resting place 
I— ^aharn!. The vyorna of that also means, by the form of the 
return movement of aharn i.e. ma-\-ha-\-a^ the nara form i.e. the 
objective phenomena represented by 'ma* being dissolved in the 
dot i.e. the amisvdra over 'ha\ enters the kundalini .^akti represented 
by the letter 'ha! and finally entering the 'a! letter which represents 
the integral, unimpeded delight of anuttara, which is identified 
with all, it becomes that (i.e. anuttara). This is the ether of my 
heart. Therefore, that from which this universe proceeds, that in 
which it rests that one alone, the eternal, the one whose nature 
cannot be veiled which is self-luminous {pratha77idna?n)^^Nhxc]x can 


Abhinavagupta 

never be denied (anapahnavaniyam) is the the unsurpass¬ 

able Absolute. As has been said; 

“Inasmuch as nothing can veil His nature, there cannot be the 
obstruction anywhere of his in whom all this world rests and from 
whom it has come forth.” (Sp. K. I, 2). 

Even if He (Siva) is supposed to be obstructed by a cover (e.g., 
mdya). He still shines by His freedom in the form of that cover 
itself,® and thus the Lord is always of the nature of knowledge 
and activity. The particle (of which j-oymm sarvatri or yatra 
and yatah sarvam or yasmat are different forms) conveys the sense 
of all the cases; on account of its fitness of relation with another 
sentence (e.g. idatri sarvani sthitam), it stands here in a special 
position i.e. it is used in the sense of the locative case {yasmin 
paramaSiva) i.e. the Supreme &va in whom it rests, and on ac¬ 
count of its fitness with another sentence (e.g. idam sarvam mrgatam ), 
it is also used in the sense of the ablative case {yasmat parama- 
iivdt) i.e. the Supreme Siva from whom it emanates. This is the 
clear, direct sense. That which is the source of the expansion 
of universal manifestation {kaulikah srsfi-prasarafi')) in the sense 
of the ablative case {yasmat ca nirgatam or yata(i sarvam), that 
which abides in the ether of my heart, in the sense of the loca¬ 
tive case {yatra sthitam or yasmin sarvam), that indeed isanuttara. 

Thus having established that the anuttara is the centre of both 
the expansion and the absorption of the universe, Bhairaya now 
establishes the expansion, which is technically caUed kriyaSakti- 
visarga which means visarga or external expansion of the spanda of 
kriyaiakti which is of the nature of vimarSa. He begins with "katka- 
yamV (i.e., I am telUng you). 

That very aspect of expansion is a-ha-m (I), para (supreme), 
anuttara (unsurpassable). Even in its regular succession of ex¬ 
ternal expansion consisting of paiyanti and madhyama denoting 
pardpara iakti, and vaikhari denoting its unbroken conti¬ 

nuity is the highest truth. ‘Katkayd/nV means: T am expressing 
it by the use of appropriate names the series of utterances upto 
vaikhari that arise from the venerable para Jakti and are expressed 
in varied scriptural and worldly forms. It has been said, “Who 
is everywhere”. 

Whether in the initial stage o£pard or the final stage of apara i.e. 
vaikhari, both of which are the expression oi roworod pardiakti and 



80 


P (iyd~l~rHxkd-Vivarana 

also in its stage of expansion in the form o(parapard i.e. in pasyanti 
and madhyama forms, it is througliont the display of tire immutable 
anuttara. Venerable Somananda has also said the same tlrino- in 
his commentary on Paratrisika. “KathaydmV' moans “I (Bhai- 
rava) say owing to the eagerness of the enquiry; that it is I who 
being present as Consciousness in all, declare tliis.” It is this 
explanation which my heart, purified by the reasoning of the 
guru, teaching of the scripture, and personal experience''(rw/.O'K- 
padeiasatnskdraih) has fully accepted. 

(Now A.G. gives different interpretations oisadyak) 

First interpretation: The nature of the highest Lord is said to 
^sadyah\^SadyaF may be analyzed into sat+rah meaning 
yah paramesvarah tat sat' i.e. ivhat the greatest Lord described 
as Bhairava, -akitla, anuttara, dhruva is, that is all this sat or 
existence, m other words kaulikavidhi or the plan of creation. (So 
sadyah means—He who is this whole universe). No object rvhat- 

p akasa oi Light and mmarsa or the consciousness of that Lio-ht 

In all matters, there are three terms, sattd (existence) sam- 
bandha (relation), and arthakriyd (purpose). Even though Uiev 

r^r^V/Jof 1? (P^rdbhimatdndmapi) by others, the 

T ^ i^^ttdhetutd). Without 

arthakriTfht cannot be the possibility of even sambandha or 
thakriya {satta-ayoge tathdtva-anupapatteh). If one requires to find 
out another being of being or another purpose of ptpose th^n 
eie vv^ould be the contingency of regressus ad infinitum Saliva or 
eternal is that liy which alone do other things derive their 

imo^'h {prakd(amayatd) of which is lirou-ht 

^e I f^In/ Himself fun of 

His pjeell" ■ “ quintessence of the eonsciesness of 

2. Or sadya may be interpreted as‘sali-sadrupe yasvali vatnam 
kar„, ..e. he ,n his nature as re, i.e. as Siva eaerls.ie t aSle 
or . iva IS the very life of the power of activity. This ,„Jya may be 
reated as neuter gender by adding the suffix kvip. 'Some elderlv 

teachers have adopted the reading Wjfi; {sat^yai) instead of 

sadyah. It has been said in Siddhasantana 


Abhinavagupta 

“The powei* that shines in appearances (such as jar, cloth etc.) 
is sat itself i.e. 6iva.” 

In Spandakarika also it has been said: 

“That (Reality) is sat in the highest sense.” (Sp. K. I, 5) 

Venerable Somananda has also said: 

“That which is sat or Siva is the highest reality {paramarthah). 
Since the universe is pervaded by that highest Reality, therefore 
the universe is also Siva. Thus His nature has been declared. It 
has been rightly said, “He who is all”.” 

(A.G. now comments on kaulikasiddhidani) 

The expansion of the power of activity of this very anuttara is 
being explained by the statement kaulikasiddhidani . 

The word ‘kaulika^ has already been explained. Its siddhi or 
perfect fulfilment is now being explained. That by which the 
being so i.e. the true nature {tathatva) oikaulika is fixed and coi“ 
roborated, is its perfect fulfilment i.e. anuttara is the true fulfil¬ 
ment of kaulika vidhi, the creative process. In that highest ex- 
perient, viz. the unsurpassable divine Consciousness, everything 
kula and akula i.e. Siva and Sakti—becomes that very Conscious¬ 
ness where all that is perceived and known acquires the firmness 
of that very nature itself {pratiyamdnam sarvam tathalvadardhyarn 
bhajate). 

It has been said: 

“Trika is higher than the highest.”® 

At another place also, it has been said: 

“The Saiva system is higher than the Vedic, the left-hand 
doctrine is higher than Saiva, the right hand doctrine is higher 
than the left; the Kula system is higher than the right-hand 
doctrine; the Matam is higher than the Kula, the Trika is highei 
even than that; in fact, it is the highest of all.”® 

In Nisacara^® Sastra also, we find the following: 

“The teacher who has been initiated as aedrya in the left-hand 
path and is considered to be knowing the supreme truth (accor¬ 
ding to left-hand path) has to undergo the ceremony of con¬ 
secration in Bhairava mdrga, he also has to receive fresh initiation 
in the Kula mdrga, he who has received initiation in Kula has to 



82 


Para- Trx§ikd- Vivarana 

receive initiation in Kaula mdrga and even he who has received 

mitiation in Kaula marga has to receive fresh initiation in the 
inka mdrgay^^ 

In Sarvacarai2 also, it has been said: 

‘The teacher who has received initiation in the left hand path 
an IS consideied to be knowing the Supreme truth has still to 
un ertake the purificatory ceremony successively in the various 
Bhairava systems, viz. Kula, Kaula and Trika.” 

the r " the stages whether of 

path Siddhanta, the left hand 

System the A^ata 

been said- ® t at abides as the highest experient. As has 

bow.” ° eternally all, to Him, the Omnifarious one do I 

central poim of his'^the^’ Proclaiming this as the 

commentary on Paratris'ika-^-^Wh ^as said in hjs 

talk, everything is anuttara, be^Iuse ITh''''" '' ^' ''''' 

Pointing out how others bn ^ anuttara:’ 

such (lucid) exposition i expounded this, leaving aside 

dialogue carried on with thoL wh"'”'"''* a fault. Though a 

of grammar, logic, traditional KachiL'’“'‘rJ; 

experience would be shamefnl . "log and have no personal 

ledge of sensible people the sa’ to bring to the know- 

ting down here their exnl^ e of their exposition, I am put- 

“By the use of the word^^ anuttara. This is how it begins: 

the question pertaining ^ half verses, 

^aktik’ the question pertain.T e ! P'^t- In hrdayastha tuyS 

which contains the answer viz^ 

the explanation offered is• •-uttarasydpyanuttarariiy 

of Sakti, and also about ^^out uttara, i.e. the expansion 

this case, if the explanation ^ expansion of Siva.” In 
there arises the contingencv point of view of Trika, 

If the explanation is from th ^ ^ ^hird question regarding nara> 
it is not two separate bein ^ of view ydmala^ even there, 
known as ydmala so that a^ ^akti whose connexion is 

justified. P3.rate question about each could be 


Abhinavagupta 


83 


The meaning oi'atha' also (occurring in the subsequent verse) 
would not fit in. Of two homogeneous realities, the word atha 
indicates the definite priority of one and the definite immediate 
sequence of the other. Without the ascertainment of the nature 
of uttara (i.e. Sakti), a question about anuttara (i.e. Siva) is 
unreasonable. 

In some old books, another such verse is also noticed: “O 
Lord, I have heard the description of the spiritual knowledge 
pertaining to trika and so through your favour I have also acqui¬ 
red knowledge pertaining to uttara,^^ 

Therefore that which the teachers have taught in accordance 
^vlth the commentary of venerable Somananda will alone do good 
to all. 

“Abhinavagupta has made the blazing Sun of commentary 
nianifest that is bent on extirpating the darkness {tdmasa) due to 
nusleading, wretched commentaries lacking the refinement of 
good teaching and tradition, that makes the heart-lotus, purified 
by the discipline of trika bloom, that, by its flashing lustre, melts 
the coagulated stream of innumerable bonds.” 

So that is said to be anuttara from which this kaulika creation 
emerges, in which it stays, and of which it is constituted. 

(Here ends the bimba portion of Paratrisika) 

(Now begins the pratibimba portion of Paratrisika) 

So, what is the kaulika mode of manifestation? How does it 
proceed from anuttara? How does it stay in it (i.e. anuttara) alone? 
How is it (i.e. kaulika vidhi) the form of anuttara itself? 

It has been said that it is the anuttara even of the posterior part 
r>f the book. It is for the explanation of all tliis that the Lord 
Bhairava proposes to devote the posterior part of the book with 
3. desire for decisive ascertainment in detail for the sake of those 
pupils who have become adroit by acquiring the understanding 
of the knowledge of reality which is the essence {niskarsana) of the 
Well-reasoned explanation of the guru {yukti)^ teaching of the 
traditional scripture {dgama) and personal experience {smsairi- 
^edana). 

There is the complete satisfaction of realization for those whose 
manifold impression of the ideas of difference has been utterly 
destroyed by so much of solid teaching in the form of the question 


84 


Para-Trisikci-1 'ivarana 


beginning with ^an.uttaram kathairC and concluded with tw^o and 
a half verses and in the form of the answer beginning with ^irnu 
devi\ and ending with a decisive statement in one and a half 
verses and who have attained to the state of jivanmukti (liberation 
in life) by entering the stage of amittora. 

Therefore, I proclaim with upraised arm that those who have 
been purified by firm conviction may rest contented with so much 
only. Now the other part of the book is begun for a thorough 
deliberation of the kaulika state inherent in the spotless mirror of 
anuttara who is the supreme Bhairava4^ 

Notes 

1. The '‘ntfara' or proximate one i.e. the entire manifestation 
from the earth upto andsrita Siva wliich is full of difference cannot 
exist without resting on anuttara w4iich is abhedabluih, the stage of 
non-difference i.e. pure undifferentiated Consciousness. 

2. It has already been said that the Devi asks questions from 
the stage of inadhyama and Bhairava answers from the stage of 
pasyanti. But pasyantl itself is the first external expansion of para. 
How can it describe the state of paroP So in spite of all the ex¬ 
planation offered by Bhairava in the pasyanti stage, the nature of 
para, really remains unanswered {anuttara). 

3. 'Kula' means Sakti and 'akula' means Siva. 'Kuldkiildtiua' 
means that in which Siva and Sakti are fused into one. 

4. Adahasrsti means creation from andsrita tattva upto ^iiddhavidya 
{hiddhddhvd), creation from nidyd upto earth is known as avdntara 
srsti {asuddhddhvd ). 

5. ^Sdmdnya spanda" or universal creative pulsation is the nature 
of Siva; visesa spanda or the creative pulsation of particulars is 
the nature of Sakti. 

6. The cover, mdyd, mala, etc., are not anything outside the 
Lord. They owe their existence to Him and are dissolved in Him. 

7. The first interpretation of 'sadyalf says "yah saC —He i.e. 
Paramesvara, the Highest Lord is sat i.e. this universe itself. The 
second interpretation of "sadyaK says that the sat or the universe 
is He i.e. Bhairava Himself. What is meant to be said is that 
Siva is the universe and the universe is Siva. 

8. Trika is designated as the highest, because it teaches that 
whether it is the initial manifestation of (1 ) Siva, or (2) Sakti— 


Abhinavagiipta 


85 


i.e. Energy in all her multifarious aspects, or (3) nara i.e. objec¬ 
tive phenomena, it is throughout antiUara. 

9. iSaiva is a technical term in this context. It connotes the 
system of dualistic philosophy or Saiva Siddhanta prevalent in 
South India. The word Ddma means beautiful, appealing. In this 
system, the five m's were allowed under certain conditions. They 
were mdiiisa (meat), matsya (fish), madird (wine), mudrd (food of 
parched grain) and maithuna (sexual intercourse). Daksa or 
Daksina dcdra (right hand path) is said to be superior to the Vdma 
or the left-hand path. It is full of mdhi and nisedha i.e. do’s and 
don’ts. A.G. says in Tantraloka, '‘^Daknnamraudrakarmddhyam^^ 
i.e., the '‘Daksina path is full of terrible practices.’ In Kula^ a great 
emphasis was laid on caryd which means due observance of cer¬ 
tain prescribed practices. Mata is said to be higher than Kula. 
Not much is known about Mata. Jayaratha has mentioned eight 
Agamas pertaining to Mata, but they are not available now. 

10. This is not available now. 

11. The Bhairava Sastra mentioned in this verse is the Rudra 
Bhairava Sastra, not the non-dualistic Bhairava Sastra advoca¬ 
ted by Paratrisika. There was a good deal of similarity between 
Kula and Kaula, but as mentioned in note No. 9, in Kula, the 
greatest emphasis was laid on caryd. In Kaula mdrga^ the greatest 
emphasis was laid on universal unity consciousness. Both Kaula 
and Trika are non-dualistic, but in Kaula mdrga^ emphasis is 
laid on all the methods, viz. jndna^ caryd^ kriydy ^.ndyoga^ whereas 
in Trika emphasis is laid mostly on jfidna and yoga. 

12. This book is not available now. 

13. The previous portion of Paratrisika is known as bimba 
grantha, and from now onwards it is known as pratibimba grantha, 
for in the previous portion, it is the nature {svarupa) of anuttara 
that has been described. From now it is its external manifes¬ 
tation or expansion that is going to be described. On the analogy 
of a mirror, the divine source of light is known as bimba (in its 
process of sarnhdra or withdrawal) and its reflection in its own 
mirror is known as srsti or manifestation or expansion. 

Exposition 

In this portion of his commentary, A.G. has shown that the 
raison d^itre of the entire manifestation {kaulika vidhi) is anuttara^ 



86 


Para- Trilikd- Vivaram 


the Absolute Divine Universal Consciousness. He has adopted 
the following ancient verse of Mahabharata (Santiparvan XII, 
47,58) as the core of his thesis and enlivened it with his own 
penetrating insight (also Yoga Vasistha VI, 36, 18): 

“YASMINSARVAM YATAH SARVAM 
YAH SARVAM SARVATASCA YAH / 

YASCA SARVAMAYO NITYAM 
TASMAI SARVATMANE NAMAH” // 

“To that omnifarious one do I bow, in whom lies all, from 
whom all starts, who is all, who is all round, and who is always 
constitutive of all.” 

First of all, he takes up ‘yatah sarvarrC i.e. from whom proceeds 
all, and after elaborating the expansion of manifestation from the 
Divine, concludes with the following remark: 

’’^Kauliko vidhih kulakulatmd vidhih mahdsrstirupo yasrnat prasrta 
etat eva anuttaram^^ \ 

“That from which proceeds Siva-Sakti, the divine insight of 
creativity itself is this anuttara,^^ 

Next, he takes npyasmin sarvam—i.e. in whom resides all this, 
and sums up his arguments by saying, 

“yasminsarva?n—a(ra spastah sannayarri vidhih kaulikah sthito visrdn- 
tirri prdptah”; 

“In whom clearly rests all this universal manifestation”—that 
IS anuttara. 

After this, he takes up ‘sarvataica yah,'' who is all round, and 
concludes with the following remark: 

'"Prathamaparyantabhuvi parabhatldrikdlmani tatprasardtmani ca 
pardparddevatavapusi anuttaradhrwoapadavijrrnbhaiva,'^^ 

“From the first stage oi para, the highest, then its expansion in 
pardpara, and finally up to the last stage oi apara or manifestation 
of the gross material world, it is all round the expansion of the 
immutable anuttara,^^ 

Now he takes up sarvamyah, and aptly quotes in this connexion 
a line from Sri Somananda: 

^^Tatsattatparamdrthohi paramdrthastatah Sivah"^ \ 

That which is Existence is the highest R.ealityj the universe is 
of the nature of that Reality, therefore everything is Siva.” 


•Abhinavagupta 

Finally, he says that it is anuttara who is constitutive of all and 
to whom we bow as the all— ^aica saroamayo nityam tasmai saroat- 
mane namah: This is the highest philosophy and at the same time 
the highest religion. 

Text 

athAdyAstithayah SARVE SVARA VINDV- 
avasAnagAh / 

TADANTAH KALAYOGENA SOMAStjRYAU 
PPLAKIRTITAU // 5 / 

prthivyAdIni TATTVANI PURUSANTANI 
paRcasu / 

kramAtkAdisu vargesu makArAxtesu 
SUVRATE II 6/ 

vAyvagni-salilendrAi^iAm dh.araxanAm 
GATUSTAYAM / 

TADCRDHVAM SAdi-vikhyAtam PURASTAT 
brahmapa5Jcakam // 7 / 
amCla tatkramAj jneyA KSANTA SRSTIR- 
UDAHR-TA / 

SARVESAM EVA mantrAijiAm vidyAnAm ca 
' YASASVINI II 8/ 

iyam yonih samAkhyAtA sarvatantresu 
sarvadA / 

Translation 

The kaulika vidhi or the manifestation of the Universe is as 
follows {tadyatha) : 

5. The fifteen {tithayahy vi7..‘a' etc. {adyahy are all the vowels 
ending in a dot, i.e. anusvara. At their end, through the connexion 
oikriya Sakti {kalayogenaY occur what are known as soma (moon) 
and surya (sun).* 

6. In the five classes ofconsonants beginning successively® with 
'ka* and ending with ‘ffia’ (kadisu makdrantesupaficasu vargesu ), there 
are the categories of existence {tattoani) beginning with the earth 
and ending with purusa {prtkivyddinipurusantaniy, O Goddess with 
excellent pious observation (suvrate). 

7. There are the four dhdranas pertaining to vayu (air), agni (fire), 
salila (water) and Indra. After that, there are the well-known ‘ia’ 
etc.’, which further on, are known as five iraAiwa (brahmapancaka). 



88 


Para- TrUika- Vivarana 


8. Therefore, beginning with ‘a’and successively ending with ‘'ksa' 
it is known as srsli or manifestation. O glorious one, this manifesta¬ 
tion consisting of ‘a’ to ‘A'ra’ is always known in all the Tantras 
as the source of all the and the incantations {vidyanatn). 

Notes 

1. '‘Tithayah’ is the plural of ‘izVAz’ which means a lunar dav. As 
there are fifteen Hithis’ in each fortnight of the lunar month, the 
w'ord HithV is used symbohcally for fifteen. So ^tithayah' means fifteen 

2. Adyah = a-\-adyah\wh.\ch.m&a.ns‘a' etc. 

3. Kdlayogena=^“kalah kalatia sfiksma-kriyaJaktih tasydh yogena 
sambandhenad’ The word ‘kata' here means subtle kriyidakli and 
yoga means connexion. So, ‘ kadayogena' means thi'ough the con¬ 
nexion of kriyaSakti. 

4. Visarga means expansion. This is a two-way track: (1 ) the 
sarnhardtmaka or the centripetal track or the track of withdrawal 
towards the centre, and (2) srstydtmaka or the centrifugal track, 
the track of projection or manifestation. 

Visarga is expressed with two dots—one above the other viz. 
Somaov moon represents the upper dot; the dot representing the 
centripetal track, the track representing the return movement 
towards the centre, the samhdrdtmaka track; Surya or Sun repre¬ 
sents the lower dot, the dot representing the centrifugal track, 
the track representing the external expansion from the centre, 
the projection or manifestation of Siva in the cosmos 

The sixteen vowels from ‘ad up to visarga represent the nature 
of Siva, and the consonants from ‘ka' to ‘had represent Sakti. 
‘Soma' represents ‘prave^a-rupa kriydsakti' (the return movement 
ot kriydiakti) ; and Surya represents the prasara-rupa kriydiakti (the 
expansion of kriydiakti). There are two modes oi kriydiakti, viz. 
(1) Sioa-vartini, and (2) paiu-vartini. Vimaria or Divine Self- 
consciousness is §iva-vartini kriydiakti. 

5. Successively : The Sanskrit word kramdt means two things : 
(i) kramdt—krama-\-ad kramdt) as swallowing all succession i.e. 
without any real succession, and (ii) successively. This points to 
the truth that in Siva, there is really no succession and that suc¬ 
cession is spoken of in relation to the empirical individual. 

6. Classes of letters together with the tattvas, organs, etc., are 
given below: 


Abhinavagupta 


89 


(1). Letters: 

ka 

kha 


gha 

ha 

Tattvas or the 

gross elements 

prthivi 

jala 

agni 

vdyu 

dkdsa 

(2). Letters: 

ca 

cha 

> 

jha 

ha 

Tanmatras 

gandha 

rasa 

rupa 

Sparta 

iabda 

(3). Letters: 

ta 

tha 

4a 

4ha 

na 

Organs of 

upastha 

pdyu 

pada 

pdni 

vdk 

actions 

(4). Letters: 

ta 

tha 

da 

dha 

na 

Organs of 

prdna 

rasand 

caksus 

tvak 

irotra 

sense 

(5). Letters: 

pa 

pha 

ba 

bha 

ma 

The psychic 

manas 

buddhi 

ahamkdra prakrti 

purusa 


apparatus, the 
primal matter 
{prakrti) and 
limited experi- 
ent (purtisa) 

(6). The dharanas or antahstha letters are the following four: 
ra, /rt, va, "‘To' symbolizes vdyu-bija, ^rcd symbolizes agni-bija^ 
Hd" symbolizes salila-bija^ symbolizes Indra-bija. The word 
blja indicates that these letters are to be used as mantras for vdyu, 
etc. These are connected with mdyd together with her kahcukas 
(coverings). '‘Ya^ is connected with rdga and niyati\ Va’ is con¬ 
nected with ^vidyd\ ^Id* is connected with ^kdla^ and ^kald\ and ^vd" 
is connected with ^mdyd\ 

7. etc., means §a^ sa^ sa, ha^ ksa. Of these, sa represents 
mahdmdyd^ sa represents Suddha vidydi^ ^sd* represents Is vara, 'hd^ 
represents Sadasiva, and ^ksd" represents Sakti. This group is 
known as brahmapaficaka. 

Commentary 

From tatrdkulam on p. 34,1. 17 upto iti sthitam on p. 38,1. 22- 

Translation 

That anuttara itself whose nature is ‘a’ is all this universal mani¬ 
festation {kaulikasrstirupam). This is what is being ascertained here. 

‘Atha'* (the first word of the above verses) is connected with 
that manifestation {tatsrsti). The meaning is that it is anuttara 



90 


Para-Triiika- Vivarana 


that constitutes the universal manifestation. Thougli according 
to the principle laid down earlier, in manifestation also, there is 
no succession (of earlier and later) which is entirely related to 
time, yet so long as there appears the difference between the 
taught and the teaching brought about by the Lord Himself 
through His Free WiU, so long the fact of succession (of earlier 
and later) has to be admitted. So, it is with reference to this 
appearance of succession, that the word ‘rttAn’ has been used in 
the sense of immediate sequence {anantarya) \.q. subsequently it 
is ‘akula'‘ itself that appears in the form of the manifested uni¬ 
verse. The word ‘atha' (now) has not been used to indicate 
immediate succession of answer after the question of Devi. 
The word ‘atha’ has been used here for clear apprehension of the 
meaning of a point arising in the sequential order of a homo¬ 
geneous object of inquiry pertaining to the same doctrine’^ {ekapra- 
ghattakagata). Otherwise there can be in every case an occasion 
for the use of‘a/Aa’ even in the sense of immediately after silence. 
If It is said ‘Well, it may be so. What is your trouble in such use?’, 
the reply is, ‘None whatsoever, except that such use is not 
found in experience.’ 

Venerable Somananda gives the following interpretation of 
‘atha ’: 

“ ‘A’ of‘a/Aa’ indicates Siva and '’tha' Sakti” and refers to Agama 
in support of it. He explains '‘athd as anuttara. Both Hha' and ‘Aa’ 
are used equally in the sense of mutual perpetual pervasion. Thus 
‘Afl’ denotes Sakti, ‘tha' also denotes Sakti. Therefore, ‘atha' has 
been used in the sense of ‘aha' because of its being non-diflerent 
from Sakti that manifests endless objects at the very initial ex¬ 
pansion of bliss and because of its depending on the highest nada 
oi parahanta (the Supreme I-consciousness) which is the very 
life of all beings. I have not examined this point in detail, for I 
am not directly aware of such an Agama. He was directly acqu¬ 
ainted with such Agamas and thus interpreted this book of 
pithy teaching {sutra granthasya) which is capable of bearing hun¬ 
dreds of reasonings and usages. He expanded in detail the subtle 
differentiation of meaning of powder (dhilli used in the sacrificial 
rites at initiation) or symbolic scripts of mantras (i.e. ^atha'* mean¬ 
ing Siva and Sakti) in that sense on the basis of this book and 
other Agamas. I who am purified by his teaching, who have a 


Abhinavagiipta 


91 


desire to purify myself by removing the difficulties occurring 
in his book, am indifferent to such interpretations as he has 
arrived at. Subtle difference of meaning of the mantra depending 
on imaginary and symbolic interpretation of the letters of a word 
may be of use to some, but cannot be of use to pupils of all coun¬ 
tries and all times. Therefore I have not described it in detail. 
Such an interpretation is of no use to those who have the benefit 
of personal experience and the rational explanation of the tea¬ 
cher; it is only easy to be managed by those who simply depend 
on their own imagination. For others who are not acquainted 
with that teaching, the impartation of that teaching will be of no 
use. Enough of this which creates an interruption in the subject 
under discussion. 

Now I follow the proposed topic. Adya in the verse means a-[~ 
ddya i.e. which is the first of the vowels. Or ^athadyd* may be 
taken together and analyzed as ^atha-^ddya\ In this case, the ^tha" 
oi^atha!' is used only for the sake of ease in pronunciation. 

The meaning again would be ^a^ which is the first of the vowels. 
In this context the word ^ddya* has not been used merely in the 
sense of the ‘foremost of an order ^ nor in the sense of ^proximity’ 
etc., but rather that whose existence continues in ‘a’ etc., i. e. in 
and all other letters {a ddaii bhavah iti ddyah) . So it is being 
decisively propoimded here that ‘a’ is the stage of the highest 
sound {pardvdgbhumih) in \Ai\ch,2loviQoi these letters there is the 
non-conventional, eternal, natural form consisting only of con¬ 
sciousness. In the nature of consciousness, the omnifaiiousness 
of everything {sarvasarvdtmakatd) is always present. That highest 
Divinity, viz. pard (who is only the dynamic form of anuttara), 
though consisting of the highest stage of non-differentiation is 
teeming wdth endless variety, containing within Herself as she 
does the pardpard expansion of pa§yanti etc.^ The maxim ‘that 
which is not there may be elsewhere’ will not hold good in her 
case. Seize (mentally) that goddess, viz. consciousness, known as 
the initial ever-creative activity of I-feehng {prathamdrn pratibhd- 
bhidhdrn)^ void of even a trace of the foul stain of limitation. 

Whatever mobile and immobile objects there are—all these 
abide in the venerable, divine, supreme consciousness of Bhairava 
{sarjimdi bhagavad-bhairava-bhattdrakdtmani) in their truest, invari¬ 
able form {pdramdrthikena anapdyind rupena)^ in the form of the 



92 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


perfect, supreme I-consciousness (lit., in the form of the quintes¬ 
sence of sheer divine energy, viryamdtrasdrdtmand), in their true 
nature which is brought out by the unfoldmeiit of endless variety 
that is perceived at the time of the emergence of hundreds of 
things that are about to appear in a slightly most indistinct, a 
slightly more indistinct, or a slightly indistinct form {tadudbhavis- 

yat-isadasphutatama-isadasphulatarn-Uadasphutddi-vasttdatasrstikdlopal- 

ciksyamdna-tattadananta-oaicilryaprathonniyamdnatathdblidvena). 

Parabhattat'ika who is the stage of omniscience {sarvajTiatdbhu- 
mih), the highest trutli without any limitation {asankiicitaparamdr- 
thd) and natural is suddenly resorted to by those who arc esta¬ 
blished in intensive awareness of that state \tathddadhdndti§aya 
riidhaih), who are purified by utmost grace {pardnugraha-pavilri- 
taih) and those whose impurities in the form of uncertainty, 
doubt or other synonymous terms owing to non-ljelief in that have 
been completely ground down by grinding on the grindstone 
of continuous spiritual discipline {abhydsakramasd/ianigharsonispesi- 

tattadapratyayarupakampadyananldparaparydyavicikiUdmalaih). E\'en 

in the case of those who are assailed by doubt, the omniscient 
stage of consciousness appears, on certain occasions'^ when they 
are able to view Reality, in a slightly limited form, though not 
in its full, natural form. 

Venerable Kallata has rightly said: 

“By the gradual elimination of tuti from the movement of 
exhalation and inhalation, there is the acquisition of omniscience 
and ominipotence.” 

Now this matter (the omniscience of Parabhuttarika) which is 
to be known only by one’s own experience is being explained by 
reasoning. 

(A.G. uses at first anvaya tarka, i.e. reasoning by positive means.) 

Indeterminate consciousness {nirvikalpa sanzvid) is that which 
by its efficacy {sdmarthya) brings something within comprehension 
which by its subsequent suitability for a particular purpose 
{arthakriydyogyatddivasa) finally acquires confirmation as a state 
of the Self and thus receives firm concurrence which precedes 
all successive determinate perceptions like blue etc., which are 
considered to be mutually incompatible {yirodhdvabhdsisamrnata- 
kramikavikalpyamdnanilddinUtha-vikalpa-purva-bhdvi) and pervades 


Abhinavagupta 


93 


undivided all those blue, yellow perceptions etc. which are admit¬ 
tedly incompatible ( tattadvikalpaniyaviruddhabhimata-^nilapUddyd^ 
bhdsavibhdgi bhavati)^ as for example in the integral perception of a 
picture (in which the difference of the various parts is not mar¬ 
ked), or the integral perception of one standing on the top of a 
hill {^ikharastha) or the integral perception of a peacock’s tail (in 
which the different colours like blue etc., are not separately 
noticed). 

(Now A.G. uses vyatireka tarka^ i.e. reasoning by negative 
means.) 

That indeterminate consciousness (nirvikalpa sarnvid)^ however, 
which does not pervade undivided the various incompatible 
percepts like blue, yellow, etc., cannot be (considered to be) 
prior also to the endless determinate percepts such as blue, yellow, 
etc., brought about by its own efficacy, as for instance, a percep¬ 
tion pinned totally to the blue. But it, known by different names 
such as unmesa^ pratibhd etc., does occur in the interval between 
two different determinate ideas or percepts, one that has just 
terminated and the other that is about to arise {astamitodesyat). 
This is what is extolled as the indeterminate consciousness in the 
Tantras {sabddgama-gitam nirvikalpakam) ^ precedent to what in 
conversation are considered to be mutually incompatible deter¬ 
minate percepts or ideas, such as blue, yello\v, etc. 

Therefore it (the nirvikalpa samvit or indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness) abides undivided among the endless determinate percepts. 
The interval between the two determinate ideas can by no means 
be denied because of the difference between the two ideas. That 
interval consists of consciousness only, otherwise (i.e., if conscious¬ 
ness is not present in the interval), on account of the extirpation 
of the residual traces of consciousness caused by that interval or 
gap (devoid of consciousness), memory, congruous link, etc. bet¬ 
ween the consciousness preceding the gap and the consciousness 
succeeding it would become impossible. 

Since there is no disagreement among all the teachers regarding 
pratibhd or indeterminate consciousness having the above charac¬ 
teristic, therefore it is free from the fallacy of asiddhi or the non- 
probative reason. Since it does not depend on the understand¬ 
ing of any conventional sign, it is sheer indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness (avikalpatva). 



94 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


In the matter of natural, non-conventional indeterminate 
consciousness which is identical with pure consciousness wliich is 
quite different from the insentient, there cannot be any similarity 
with determinate consciousness, for in it differentiation has not 
appeared. Objects are known only when their characteristic 
difference is marked. Determinate perceptions do not arise with¬ 
out the indeterminate consciousness because they lack the freedom 
for emerging by themselves. This freedom belongs only to in¬ 
determinate consciousness, for it is only indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness that serves as means for the recollection of the conventional 
signs etc. How can the recollection of conventional signs etc. be 
possible without the experience of indeterminate consciousness? 
In such consciousness, according to the previous principle, there 
is the absence of the limitation of time, etc. Thus the one divine 
indeterminate consciousness {pratibhd) defined by my weighty 
statement is of this kind i.e. of unlimited nature, the very Self 
of all. Not only in the beginning and the end but in the inter¬ 
vening state also, she is the origin of the emergence of the 
other present, past and future determinate apprehensions. Those 
who are adept in discrimination have experienced dlqya-vijiidna 
i.e. unified or integral knowledge in this very way (i.e. in the 
way of indeterminate consciousness). 

Agreement of the determinate apprehensions occurring im¬ 
mediately after the indeterminate one has already been shown. 
Therefore, there is no non-probative reason {asiddha hetu) for the 
probandum (i.e. that which is to be proved viz., the determinative 
perceptions), nor can it be said that the prdtibha jndna is confined 
to only indeterminate consciousness which remains uniformally 
the same, which allots separate positions to the various deter¬ 
minate perceptions {vikalpas) and which is not opposed to 
prdtibha jndha or which is usually concerned with bringing about 
determinate perceptions and only appears in pure indeterminate 
form now and then {kaddcit)^ nor is there complete exclusion or 
separation of the determinate consciousness {asya) from the 
indeterminate consciousness {tataK). Therefore, there is no con¬ 
tradiction {ria viruddho) between the indeterminate consciousness 
and any other apprehension, nor is indeterminate consciousness 
simply an occasional and not uniform ground (of the determinate 
consciousness) {ndnaikdntiko)^ nor is there an exclusion from it 


95 


Ahhinavagupta 

of even any dubious, opposite thing (i.e. even opposite things have 
their Taison d’itre in the indeterminate consciousness). In similar 
examples also, e.g., the integral perception of a picture etc., 
faults like the non-provability etc., of the reason (viz. the indeter¬ 
minate consciousness) stand rejected. When the faults concern¬ 
ing the main reason are rejected, there remains no occasion 
for finding faults in examples similar to the main reason. By 
others also it (i.e. the indeterminate consciousness being the 
ground or reason of the determinate one) has been practically 
settled. Therefore, why take the trouble of repeating it ! This 
matter has been finally settled: 

“That which moves in the prior, intervening, and posterior state 
of the apprehension of all the objects of sense {nikhilamisayika- 
vabodha-purvdpardntaracaraTTi), which is universal {nikhildttnakatri), 
which is endowed with the splendour of the highest Sakti {paralakti- 
bhdsi), that indeed is the divine creative consciousness (prdtibham). 
To one who is absorbed in that consciousness {tasydm pralinava- 
pusahi), how can depression (gldnify) brought about by the lack 
of this divine consciousness {abhdvanaiopaklfptyd') ever occur? 

“The ignorant man does not observe the magnitude of the 
delightful enjoyment of the most precious wealth {paradhana- 
stikkdsvdda) lying in the body, prd^a etc.* and feels overwhelming 
depression® in his heart. If the Supreme goddess who feels parti¬ 
cular relish in bringing into being the entire universe {nikhilajaga- 
tisfitisarasd) enters his heart, then oh ! she sportively functions as 
the full and final oblation (in reducing to ashes the depression 
that had been plagueing him).” 

A similar idea has been expressed in Spandakarika: Just as a 
plunderer carries away the valuables of the house, even so de¬ 
pression saps away the vitality of the body. This depression pro¬ 
ceeds from ignorance. If that ignorance disappears by mmefa 
how can that depression last in the absence of its cause?”® (Sp. 
K. Ill, 8). 

Also in the following verse: 

“That should be known as unmesa whence the rise of another 
thought takes place in the mind of a man who is already engaged 
in one thought. One should experience it introspectively for 
oneself.” (Sp. K. Ill, 9). 



96 


P ard- Trisikd- f ^ivarana 


Further: 

“The wise ones describe ignorance or in other words the primal 
limiting condition {anava mala) as the root cause of the mayiya and 
karma mala. That very seed (viz., anava mala) even of the worn- 
out tree® of transmigratory existence is consumed instantly in the 
supreme blazing fire of supreme consciousness {parasainvit).''’ 

As has been (rightly) said: 

“Ma/a, they sa>^ is nothing but ajriana or ignorance of one’s 
ignorance is the cause of samsara or mayiya mala 
which again serves as the cause of karmamala”. (M.V. I, 23) 

So also, (it has been said) : 

“If that ignorance disappears by unmesa, hotv can depression 
last in the absence of its cause?” 

Thus has been described the nature of indeterminate consci¬ 
ousness (which also pervades the determinate consciousness). 
If It were otherwise than this i.e. if the indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness did not pervade the determinate consciousness also in all 

Its phases then which and by what could the follotving be so 
of denr!' of depression, the emergence 

destmcZn "f ™ ^^^ential nature), and the 

fh?s wruTd b by means unmesa. In that case, all 

be meret fudlf and i.e. would 

is of\he^^°'^'^T’ the highest power of creative word {paravak) 

with ^ksJ f u" 'T"’ and ending 

Paratara iovZ T I enfolding within herself the venerable 
etc inherent m pasyanli etc., that arc about to 

is identical wkhTh ’ 

sistine of iirtl r diverse manifestation con- 

undSutedl! and objects that have been 

expansion fW included in her progressive 

p p ncaprabodhaikyacamatkarasara), is of the nature of the hio-hest 

^ fh f fu (P^^^^’^^^^^’-^^hairaoabhatfdrakdoirbhava- 
prathttatathavidhadbhulabhutaparamdrthasvarupd), is the Supreme 

Creative Power that reveals within her pure minor of Self end¬ 
less manifestation, maintenance and absorption {svdtrnavimaladar- 


Abhinavagupta 


97 


pananirbhdsitdnantasrstisthitisaTYihdraikyamayamahdsrstiiaktir) . It is 
established that this is what has been decisively proved completely 
by Lord Bhairava by means of the verse '‘athddya^ etc. 

Notes 

1. The question of the De\d and the answer of Bhairava refer 
to the state of Reality i.e. svarupa-dimaria. Therefore, both are 
homogeneous objects of the same doctrine. 

2. See the charts for clarity. 

3. Vide verse 75 of Vijnana-Bhairava. 

4. ‘Et cetera’ refers to puryastaka and ^dnya pramdtd. 

5. The depression is due to the lack of recognition of the essen¬ 
tial nature of the Self. 

6. The ‘worn out’ {jima) tree suggests that the mdyiya and 
kdrma mala have been eliminated, but since the dnava mala is still 
lingering, it supplies sustenance to the tree and so, although it 
is worn out, it does not fall. 

7. If ‘«r’ and ‘j&a’ are pronounced together, then it means a 
king, but if and are disjoined and are uttered after an 
interval, they would mean nothing. Even so if gldni is connected 
with ajndna^ and ajndna is removed immediately by unmesa^ then 
the sequence is understandable, otherwise not. 

Exposition 

This long commentary of A.G, serves only as an introduction 
to the eight verses by means of which Bhairava answers the ques¬ 
tion of the Devi, viz. “How does anuttara bestow kaulika siddhiV^ 

The actual interpretation of the verses will follow later. In 
this introductory portion A.G. has stressed the following two 
points: 

1. Kaulika srsfi or the universal manifestation is not something 
different from anuttara. It is anuttara itself that appears as kaulika 
srsti. As he puts it Hadeva anuttarapadam^ srstirityarthah —it is anuttara 
itself that is this vast manifestation. 

2. The entire manifestation abides in the creative energy of the 
Divine. This creative energy is pardvdky the energy that sounds 
forth the universe. The pardvdk is the parandda^ the creative throb 
of the Divine Mind which at a lower level takes the form of 
sound. The energy of the pardvdk flows into various letters from 



98 


Para-Trisika-Javarana 


‘a’ to 'ksa' which as conscious forms of energy bring about the 
manifestation of the universe. The letters in their original form 
are not merely conventional as they are at the human level. 

The pardvdk is dynamic, creative consciousness. The nature of 
this consciousness is nirvikalpa, indeterminate, undifferentiated. 
According to A.G., pardvak, pratibhd, unmesa, nirvikalpa samvid are 
almost synonymous; they refer to the same creative energy of the 
I-consciousness of anultara. All determinate objects, perceptions, 
ideas covered by the blanket term savikalpaka inhere in the nirvi¬ 
kalpa sarnvid and emanate from it. The entire kau/iki srsti or uni¬ 
versal manifestation is simply an expression of nirvikalpa samvid. 
A.G. has used nirvikalpa sarnvid in a very wide sense, in the sense 
of the divine creative consciousness, the very life of all manifesta- 
tion. 


Commentary 

From tade-oam sthite on p. 38, 1. 22 upto iti on p. 51, 1. 22. 

Translation 

It bdng so, the meaning of the verse is now being decisively 
feed. The letters from ‘a’ to visarga denote ^iva tattva-, those from 
ka to na denote the five elements from the earth up to the ether- 
those from ra upto to r~ia denote the five tanmdtras from smell up 
to sound; those from ta to ria denote the five karmendriyas (organs 
ol action) from the feet upto the tongue; those from ta to na de¬ 
note jndnendriyas from the nose up to the ears; those from pa 
to ma denote the group of five i.e., manas, aharnkdra, buddhi, prakrli 
^.n&purusa■, those ivomya to va denote through vdyu bija, agni bija, 
jala bija and indrabija, rdga, vidya, kald and mdyd taltvas. These 
are also known as dharatias, because they make the arm or the 
enipirical individual think of the universal powers of Bhairava 
differently {prtkagbhutatayd). There are two causatives involved 
here, owing to the causer and the caused being of two forms d 
So, in one’s own self which is light, highest and perfect state, 
identical with Bhairava, and universal are held the states of 
kald, vidya, etc., as has been said in Sivadrsti: “Self alone who 
shines as bliss {dnanda), and consciousness {cit), whose advance 
of will-power {icchd) is un-impeded, moves forward in all the 


Abhinavagupta 

objects as Siva whose knowledge (jnana) and activity {kriyd) are 

ever prevalent” (S.D.I. 2). j 

In Spandakarika also, the same idea has been expressed: In 

whom resides all this”. _ . 

So also, the Lord assumes these states {of rdga, vidyd, kald, myati) 
which are held in His shining Self by His own Ught by veiling 
Himself, that is to say. He manifests by adopting the state of 
thisness (i.e. objectivity) whose nature is insentiency. Then 
again He encompasses all this objectivity with I-feeUng. So this 
state of the Lord as Sadasiva and Isvara which is pure Siva- 
consciousness {suddharndyamayi) has been liinted at by one causa¬ 
tive form of the verb VAr’. In this case also the encompassing of 
tliisness with I-ness can happen only when that which is to be 
encompassed (viz., thisness) has already been effected. And 
from the point of view of the pure Lord who is all consciousness, 
thisness denoting difference cannot remain in that state (i.e., as 
something different or separate from consciousness), and so in 
the event of the non-occurrence of that which is to be encom¬ 
passed, the encompassing of this with I-ness cannot properly be 
upheld. In that case, there cannot be any propriety in considering 
Siva in the capacity of an encompasser. And without his encom¬ 
passing activity, nothing whatsoever can appear, because of the 
absence of a proper cause. This has been declared by me many a 
time. The ‘this’ or external appearance, however, does occur. 
This only means that the ‘this’ or external appearance, though 
now different from the (divine) Ught does appear externally 
through the power of the Lord Himself, for any other cause 
(than the Lord) is impossible. In one’s consciousness also, one 
can bear witness to the fact that it is the (divine) consciousness 
that appears in all forms. Thus it is clear that while the universe 
is the Self itself, i.e. identical with the Self (in its transcendental 
aspect), it appears differently as ‘this’ (in its immanent aspect). 
The ‘this’ appears only appositionally in the I which is all light 

(as in the case of Sadasiva or Isvara). ^ ^ 

So from the above, this is what is most certainly indicated, 
viz., it is the Lord Himself who knows all the different knowables 
(e.g., kdla, rdga, etc.) of any knower whatsoever in the manner 
of ‘I’ i.e. in the manner of Saktis identical with Himself. Who¬ 
ever may be the knower (i.e. the limited, empirical experient). 



100 


Pa rd- Trisikd- Vivarana 


he too because of his appearing as a knower, is the Self itself 
So he rehes on such limited saktis (i.e. kdla, rdga, etc.) and tliroucrh 
these (i.e. limited kdla, rdga, etc.) he experiences the state of the 
knower and knowables (objects) as (totally) different 

l.hrough raga (passionate desire) etc., only He (3iva) has been 
reduced to the status oi ^ pasu (an empirical individual) etc So 
raga assume, according to the principle stated previouslv,' the 
position of the inciter (lit., the causer) of Siva to regard in a 
himted way those states ^vhich otherwise He regards as His Saktis. 

Iherefore, the second causative verb {nic) havin<r come into 
operation, diose (i.e. A-./., etc.) becoming the s^le causetf 

biva being designated as j/.iz (empirical individual) are spoken 
of as dhara7m. Even if a causative form of a verb is in operation 
the connexion with the meaning of the root of the verb is never 
lost {prakrtyarthd,imydnapdyo), so in this case also, the causative 
force of the root dhr can be applied only to that which has Si 

they a “S as ,1‘ h“" ''' 

cauLdit rr aS r str 

He alone can be impelled who has the e i • 

impelled.” Bhartrhari has also said (in Vakyaplil)^- 

the capacity to act), verbs with reference tn r. . . ! 

etc. are used in the imperative form (lot) wheT ^ 
command is to be given (praise). But when a dh 
mand is to be given to one who has commenced tlcltr^ 
a matter of the use of the causative form (me) ” ’ ^ 

What IS known as kaheuka (coverine) in ntiaas,. <5.- * , 

"wvr—'■>='» taid in TantrasS; 

be purified with effort.” {‘To be puttfied’'n"ans 'i ? 

anutlara by anusandhdna and to dissolve in it M S -H 

explained the word in the sensVe^f itif™terns 

h orn another point of view (viz. the advaita or nondualistic point 
ol view). In his commentary, he means to say that in the case 
ol limited empirical individual (parapaksa), all states like rdaa 


Abhinavagupta 

kala, vidya should be taken as objective {drSyatva) with reference 
to the Self. 

Such is his particular manner of interpretation: “He who does 
not know fully the standpoint of the supreme experient {soapaksaY 
and that of the hmited, empirical individual (parapaksa) himself 
sinks in the ocean of doubts. How can he enable others to cross 
it?” 

The letters from ‘ia’ to ‘ksa’ denote the group of five categori^ 
viz. Mahamaya, Suddhavidya, Isvara, Sadasiva and Sakti. 
Above the category o£ mdya, and below the category ofSuddha- 
vidya, there must be another category as the abode of the Vijfia^ 
nakalas. As has been said “Above maya and below Suddhavidya 
are the Vijnanakevalas.” If Mahamaya is not accepted as a 
category (Ut. in the absence of the category of Mahamaya), 
then the abode of pralayakevalis being in maya category, and that 
of the Vidyesvaras in Suddhavidya, which would be the abo e 
of the Vijnanakalas? Therefore, it has been declared in Purva- 
sastra (i.e. Malinivijayottara) that the Vijnanakalas have only 
one mala (limitation), for though they are below the stage of 
Suddhavidya, there does not appear in them the limitatioii 
{mala ) known as maylya, because in their case, the disp ay o 
different objects caused by differentiation does not occur. So 
they have only dnava mala which is ignorance (of one’s essential 
nature). They alone being enlightened through the grace o 
Suddhavidya become entitled to the status of Mantra, Manlre 
^vara and Mantramahesvara. In Malinivijaya itself {tatraiv^ 
it is said, Anantabhattaraka enlightened (lit. awakened) the 
hmited experients, viz., the eightRudras {jivdn) who have attained 
the status of Vijnanakala (p. 3. v. 19), 
and also : 

“Having united them to Suddhavidya, Isvara and Sadasiva, 
he (Anantabhattaraka) similarly manifested seven crores of 
Mantras together with their regions of administration.” 

In some Sastras (other than Trika) Mahamaya, on the assump¬ 
tion of the absence of mala (limitation) pertaining to difference 
i.e., absence of mdyiya and kdrma mala, is accepted as the l^t 
part of Suddhavidya category. At some places, because of its 
being an impediment in the form oid^aoa-mala which is ignorance 
of the essential Self, the state is considered to be the last or 



102 


Para- Triiikd- Vivarana 

extreme end of maya, just as in some Sastras, the raga category 
IS supposed to be adhering to the empirical individual, there¬ 
fore, it is not considered separately, Just as here itself, nijati and 
kdla are not described separately (from raga and kala) in the 
Trika Agama. According to this view, the five brahmas as denoted 
by sa, sa, sa, ha and ksa are Suddhavidya, Isvai a, Sadasiva, 6akti 
and Anasrita Siva, respectively. This will be clarified later. 
They are known as ‘brahma' because the root ‘brh' from which the 
word ‘bralmia' is derived means ‘to grow great’ and ‘to make 
grow’. These categories are called ‘brahma' firstly because they 
transcend difference (bhedasamuttirnatvat) (from the point of view 
of brhalva ‘growing great’) and secondly because thev brincr 
about the production of the universe of differentiation {samsara- 
sutikartrtvat)iYom the pointof view of brmhakatva—‘nvaklng grow’) 
These thirty-four categories having been settled acco’cTin- to 

the procedure of the Sastra resort to ‘«’ only, as that is the initial 
and primal letter. 

In this connection, this is what is to be examined. Firstlv there 
IS the Siva taltva assigned to the ‘a’ class (i.e. ‘a’ to visarga), then 
there are the five elements (in kavarga) etc., and finallv there is 
sakh (assigned to ‘ksa'). What is this particular order in the 
descent of the mantras pertaining to srsli, samhdra and sthUP'^ 
In all the Sastras e.g. in Malinivijayottara, Siddliatantra, Svac- 
chanda Tantra, the arrangement of letters denoting the various 
tattms or categories of existence from ‘ksa' upto ‘a’, from the 
<fl//e,«^_the earth {{nthivi) upto Siva is given in the same manner. 

It is said in Malini-Vijayottara: 

“The initial one i.e. prthim anda is pervaded bv dhdrikd-^ in that 
only one tattva i.e. prthim (earth) is acknowledged. While consi¬ 
dering the succession oUarna* (letters), pada (ivord), and mantra 
It IS only ksa varna, ksa pada, and ksa mantra that should be reo arded 
separately in succession.” (M.V. II, 50). 

In the same book (i.e. in the same Malinivijayottara Tantra) 
according to MalinI in which there is a mixed arrangement of the 
vowels and the consonants consisting of the letters °pha' etc., the 
arrangement of the categories earth {pithivi) etc. begins witll the 

_ {Coiitinued on page 1 04) 

*In this syslcm, any jfloM or letter is called <ir,m or mantra, for sotoriolotti- 
rally, it protects one who reflects on it {manandttraYatc) . 



Abhinavagupta 


103 


Chart 1 

THE VARIOUS A.XDA OR ELLIPSES 
CONTAINED IN ANUTTARA 


Anuttara is all-pervasive. The name of the A aid is Avakasada 
kald according to Trika. In other Saivagamas it is called Santya- 
tita-A:a/5. Its presiding deity is Anuttara itself. It is beyond all 
the tattvaSy but contains all the tattvas in itself. It is beyond all the 
mala or limitations, but comprehends all the malas. Its state is 
one of abheda or non-difference, and it is beyond all the adhvas. 




104 


Para- Trisikd- Viva rana 


last letter pha . In Aldtrkd^ in which, there is no mixed arrange¬ 
ment of the vowels and the consonants and though in it the assign¬ 
ment of the tattvas to various letters is different, there is the same 
assignment of the category earth (prlhivi) to the last letter in 
both. The relevant verse regarding Malini* is as follows: 

“The earth category has been mentioned in "pha" and from 
'da" up to "jha" i.e., from water up to pradhdna or prakrti, one 
should mark twenty-three categories successively” (M.W I\\ 15). 

Again in the same book, it is said according to the three vidvds,^ 
There is the mantra of one letter (i.e. aurn) in Siva tattva {niskale) 
and the other two, viz., one of three letters i.e. aghore and the 
other of one letter i.e. krirn {tryarnaikdrnadvayam) are in the other 
two {dvaye) i.e., in Sakti and Sadasiva” (M.V. IV, 19). 

According to pardpard devl, "awn" refers to Siva tattva. and "ac^- 
hore refers to Sakti tattva. It is in this way that the order of the 
successive tattvas has been fixed.® 

From the point of view of apard devi also it is said: “With the 
mantra of one and a half letters are pervaded the two ellipses 
(viz. prthivi ellipsis i.e. prthivyanda and prakrti ellipsis i.e., prakr^ 
tyanda), with the mantra of one letter are pervaded two ellipses 
separately (viz., mdyd ellipsis i.e. mdydnda and ^akti elhpsis i.e. 
saktyanda. This pervasion of apara mantra has been described in 
the reverse order’ (M.V.IV, 24), So the arrangement of the 
tattvas is as follows. The mantra '’phat ’ refers to two ellipses prthivi 
and prakrti, ‘’hurrC refers to maya ellipsis, and the mantra ^hrirrP 
refers to sakti ellipsis. So far as the pervasion of the para mantra 
IS concerned, a different order has been laid dowm as given below: 

Three ellipses (viz. prthiviy prakrti Vind mdyd) are pervaded 
by the phoneme, "sa", the fourth one (viz., the sakti ellipsis) 
IS pervaded by the trident i.e., au, and the one that transcends 
all, viz., Siva is indicated by the visarga i.e., ah. This is how the 
pervasion of:para is described.®” (M.V. IV, 25). 

In the mantras Matrkasadbhava, Ratisekhara, and Kulesvara, 
different arrangements (i.e., different from Paratrisika) also are 
noticed.® In other Tantras also, usually opposite arrangements 


* The arrangement of letters according to Malini is the following: 
r r j I th c dh i n u u b k kh g gh h i a V bh y cl dh th jh h j r ^ 
P ch 1 a s ah h s ks m s ain t e ai o au d ph. 



Abhinavagupta 


105 


are given in many ways. But in this i.e. Paratrisika, an altogether 
different arrangement is noticed. So to one proficient in Agama, 
this appears as destructive of one’s own principles, as sometimes 
a bangle of glass or shells gets shattered by the clash of its own 
components. Nor can it be merely conventional so that it could 
be considered to be opposite even if determined in varied ways 
according to the fabrications of a man’s fancy, as for instance, the 
southerners designate ‘boiled rice’ with the word ^caura^ and the 
inhabitants of Sindha designate ‘thief’ with the same word, and 
‘boiled rice’, they designate with the word ^krura\ The Kash¬ 
miris, however, indicate with that word (i.e. krura) husked barley, 
wheat and rice. If it is to be treated as conventional, it cannot be 
definitely determined because of its being unsettled, because of 
its being unconcerned with the highest truth and because of its 
uselessness concerning the relation between that which is to be 
purified and the purifier {^odhya-iodhaka-bhava), If it is said that 
even a conventional word derives its existence from the Will of 
God, that it cannot be anytliing whatsoever without the Will of 
the Highest Lord, and that it is well known that convention 
comes forth by the will of God, for peace is gained by the dpyd^ 
yandS^ ceremony that is performed for the welfare and prosperity 
(of a particular individual) and that ceremony depends entirely 
on the name, word, script etc., which are entirely conventional, 
then my reply is that everything can be acquired only by one 
conventional word (for all countries, all times and all men), why 
should there be the necessity to resort to other conventions (for 
different countries, times etc.)? If one has to depend on conven¬ 
tion only, then will arise the problem of endless conventions 
coming down from one’s own Sastra, from another Sastra, popu¬ 
lar conventions, conventions of particular assemblies, cqtiventions 
coming down from a host of teachers, convention particular for 
each different person and so on. Tliis problem will ako have to 
be examined. It may be said that there is no use going into these 
details. ‘The relation between the purifier and that which is to 
be purified will be the same in any case and this is enough to 
achieve our object’; this also uttered by and heard from illiterate 
people is indeed becoming to themselves. 

If it is said that God’s will is perfect, it is not open to dis- 

{Coniinued on page 108 ) 



106 


Para-Tr iji ka-1 V ra i ana 


Chart 2 A 


THE IDENTITY OF THE ORIGINAL SOURCE 
(BIMBA) AND ITS REFLECTION (PRATIBIMBA) 



















































A bhinavagupta 


107 


Chart 2B 

the transposition of the TATTVAS (CATE¬ 
GORIES OF EXISTENCE) IN REFLECTION (PRATIBIMBA) 

BIMBA PIL\TIBIMBA 


Prlluvi ^ka 
Jala Xklu 
Agni #ga 
Vayu #gha 


Akdsa 

M ha 

Gandha 

/ca 

Rasa i 

f cha, 

RQpa A 

r ja \ 

Sparsa m 

jIUl V > 

.^abda f 

ha V > 




Buddhi 1 

ba ^ 

Prakrli 1 

bha> 

Purusa 1 

\ nia ^ 

Raga 

\ya . 

Vidya 

\r. 


Kala % la 
Maya \ va 
Mahamaya ^ sa 
Suddhavidya sa 
Isvara X sa 
Sadaiiva ha 
sakli X ksa 


sakti 
sadasiva 
isvara 

suddhavidya 
mahamaya 

mfiya 
kaia 

vidya 

raga 
purusa 
prakrti 
buddhi 
ahainkSra 
manas 
irotra 
ivak 
cak$u 



108 


Pa rd- TriHkd- Vivarana 


cussion, then enough of useless efforts like reading and concen- 
trating on books, exposition, discussion etc. This heavy burden 
should certainly be abandoned. One should then sit quietly. 

would save one who is to be saved. It is His 
mercifhl will that makes one depend on such thought. 

lying “th 

for themsf-lv ' u enjoyment, without deUberating 

appHcS of ^he constant 

tioVbrreht S ?7t^^/-teUect for the subtlest deUbera- 
Lord which annea^ ' ^ ^^tenser and intenser grace of the 
praxis). Therefor/th^ accordance with one’s sddhana (spiritual 
in all respects • I am ^ ^aeshon raised by me has to be examined 

Therefore, thinking caSulfv^^ 

I remove the difficulties involled" 

. -^^sqaestion-answerinuc 

Ae divine pardvdk f tb partially—resides really 

IS autonomy {svdtantrva^ ^ whose quintessence 

'^"surpassable and is^ of everything, 

of ^ ^‘^complish and wh^ about what is most 

dependence on^th;; "b " even by an ioth 

agaiT'^ ®^ttled even before. practically satis- 

been in order to i-e it is being explained 

mentr? ta doubts. The doubt has 

no order '^hat is thi^^*”^ (solidity) taitva has been 

’^hich incl a °^derless, the hi ^ order? I say it is 

of the tvithin itself end! ^ autonomy of the Lord 

(P.ra) So, thafw? This is the teaching 

differentiating ^hairava and highest divine Ens 

dating and the different'' 

^asritaSiv ( abides ‘^*‘"g-oum-non-differen- 

'"g over even th^?^"'^deeventlmr"°'' Sadasiva and 

everything else b !u one) (p her seat (i.e. presid- 

instance g “fl '"'"b or bimha, and 

Sadasiva in the f’Jr^^^^tra i g or represented form-) 

departed one, smir -^S'vords: o^^^yyaya at first refers to 

e meditated upon ^ both consr'^'^^^^''^ gigan^^^ 

W> (M.V. vm T '^eat of ^"d unconscious should 

d),andconclurf^^ Supreme divine 

es by saying that Sadasiva 


Ahhinavagupta 


109 


who has entered the nadantd^^ state is her seat, and then having 
said that “all this is her seat,” declares: “From his (i.e. Sadasiva’s) 
navel rises the trident of Sakti (divine Energy) with three prongs 
which should be meditated upon” (M.V. VIII 69). The three 
prongs referred to are “Sakti, Vyapini, and Samana”. There 
^Iso (i.e. higher above the Saktis), the Supreme abode of unmand 
i-e. the state of urdkoakwKpalini, in the form of three white lotuses 
has been described, in the words “this is the most distinct seat” 
(M.V., p. 48, V. 70). So far as the three lotuses on the prongs 
of the trident are concerned, they form the seats of the goddesses 
jpard-paSyanti, pard-madhyama, and pard vaikhari).* Though this is 
*nown as paiyanti and is the ultimate limit oijfidnaMti 

hnown as ndda (i.e. as the state of Sadasiva), yet this has only 
^0 be passed over, for the state of Para is liigher than this (see 
fhe picture introducing the Paratrisika Vivarana). As has been 
in Sivadfsti: “What according to us is jndnaiokti and is really 
0 level of pavd-paiyanti as expressive of Sadasiva state is to the 
offers, the grammarian’s the liighest state. 

. The buddhi that is introverted towards the inner spiritual Self 
the level of pard-paiyanti. Its presiding deity is Rudra i.e. Para- 
j^opreme) Sada^va. The pard-paSyanti comes to an end mjndna- 
g ^ which is a state of Para-Sadasiva, and this state of Para- 
odasiva is the Sakti of Anasrita-Siva. 
j., ^0 presiding deities of tnunas and ahatnkdTO- introverted towards 

0 Self are respectively Para-Brahma and Para-Vi?nu. Their 
®ld of activity is limited respectively to pard-vaikhari and pard 
Therefore, their final resting abode {pratis(hd-bhuh) 
ved of Para-Isvara and Para-Sadafiva.i« Xhis is pro- 

by Agama and supported by personal experience. 

-fherefore, over pard-paiyanti is the stage of goddess pard where 
V ^^ything appears and is also apprehended as identical with 
'herself. 


the ^ philosophy, there is the bimba-pratibimbmada i.e. the principle that 
- otain factors that exist in the lower sphere have their original source in the 
sphere. paSyanti,madhyama, ranlAiiri that exist in manifestation have 
tu original forms at the higher'level of Therefore, the original forimof 
" tit the higher level are called pard paiyanti, pard rnadhyamd and pard vaikharu 
seated in the following order; The Para Ls seated on the imddle 
the Parapara on the right and the Apara on the left- 





















110 


Para- Triiikd- Vi va rana 


Though in the stage of Suddhavidya and also of Maya or 
the state of pralaydkala, bhdsand (i.e., the existence of prakd§a and 
vimarsa) abides in identity, yet in that stage, the apprehension 
of ‘this’ (i.e. objectivity) is different. In Suddhavidya, the entire 
multitude of subjects and objects is reflected in the sole T’. It is 
apprehended only as fully dominated by the I-consciousness, 
such as “/ am this^\ 

Thus both of these [etat ubhayam i.e. both / and this) being 
reflected in the common substratum of the supreme consciousness 
appear as identical and so are said to have a common substratum 
{sdmdnddhikaranyam ). 

Therefore all existents share the pardpard state (i.e. the state 
of identity in diversity) in the stage of Isvara, and in the stage of 
Maya (and also oipralaydkala) they share the state oi apard (i.e. 
the state of differentiation). 

One should not understand from this that the Isvara state and 
Maya state are themselves pardpard and apard, (It is only their 
prameyas or objects at their stage that are the pardpard and apard 
sUtes.) Therefore, there is no room for doubting that what the 
Agama (viz. Rudrayamala) has affirmed is contrary to what the 
venerable Utpaladeva has said about pardpard with reference to 
Isvara. 

In the case of Mantramahesvara, the I-feeling though having 
knowledge as its highest truth, is however, different from the 
I-feeling of Isvara and Suddhavidya which is apard i.e. of a lower 
order. My experience {samvit) tells me that ‘this’ i.e. the I-feeling 
of Isvara and Suddhavidya is only this i.e. of a lower order than 
the I-feeling of Sadasiva, Sakti and Siva. 

The vijndndkalas, however, have only an awareness of‘I’ which 
though of the order of knowledge {bodhaikaparamdrthe api rupena) 
is devoid of the experience of ‘this’ i.e. objectivity. Because of 
their non-awareness of objective reality, they have only an aware¬ 
ness of ‘I’ and, therefore, they are in the category of aprabuddha 
i.e. unawakened. The pralayakevalis are non-aware of both T’ and 
‘this’. Therefore they are decidedly unawakened. 

In the stage of pralqyakevali and iunyapramdtd [mdydpade —which 
is the abode of §unyapramdtd) though by means of the light of in¬ 
determinate consciousness {nirvikalpakatdbhdsena) ^ there is an un¬ 
derlying sensibility of that sort (i.e. indeterminate consciousness). 


Abhinavagupta 


111 


which is the ver^^ life (of determinate consciousness), though they 
owe their very existence to the grace of the indeterminate consci¬ 
ousness only and cannot be in any way separate from it,^° yet the 
later dealing and judgement of such experients (i.e. when they 
have risen from the state of the experience of the void) are deter¬ 
mined by consciousness of difference and are only of the nature 
of determinate consciousness {vikalpdtmaiva)^ as for example, 
“This is body etc., I am only I, i.e. the one who is the knower, 
this is ajar, what is ‘this’ is only an object of knowledge etc.”. 

In the case of the condition of such an experient (i.e. pralayd- 
kala or iunyapramdtd)^ it is only the indeterminate consciousness 
that has the capacity of bringing about a consciousness of that 
sort {tasyaiva amkalpasamviddtmanah tathd sdmarthyam). For though 
none other than the nirmkalpa one is known to be the cause of tliat 
kind of consciousness (i.e. the determinate consciousness), even 
if any other cause is supposed to be its origin, it will ultimately 
end only in that kind of undivided universal consciousness (i.e. 
nirvikalpaka or indeterminate I-consciousness). It is because of this 
capacity of the indeterminate I-consciousness that its power of 
bringing about endless variety (in manifestation) is proved to be 
invariable. 

In the being of this indeterminate I-consciousness, its sovere¬ 
ignty of the creativity never ceases. In vaikkari stage or in madhyamd 
stage in which there is subtle mdyiya objectivity (i.e. where there 
is a subtle difference through the force of mdyd)y this kind of 
apprehension of difference {bheda^vimaria) is not possible if it is 
completely excluded from the indeterminate I-consciousness 
(bhdsandtireki). 

In the supreme consciousness, ho^\ ever, as is the prakdsa so is the 
vimar^a for carrying it out in practice. Therefore in that, all 
things appear completely identical with consciousness, just as 
water is in water, or flame is in flame, not simply like a reflected 
image. Whenever this supreme goddess {pard) is described for 
the purpose of teacliing, she is brought within the sphere of 
cognizance only by being considered from an inferior point of 
view. 

Similarly Bhairava \vho is of the nature of light (i.e. spiritual 
light of consciousness) is self-proved, beginningless, primal, the 
ultimate in all respects, and present in everything. Wliat else 


112 


Pard-TrUikd- Vkarma 


is to be said regarding Him?* He displays His Light identically 
{svaprakdsam prakdsayati) in the expansion of all the categories of 
existence (e.g. the 36 tattvas), all the objectiv^e phenomena {blid^ 
vas), and views them all as Himself {tathaiva ca vimarsati) in His 
self-delight which never vanishes {anapeta). That 

wHch is this perception in that way (i.e. as identical with Him- 
se ),ma es His self-revelation {bhdsana) evident in lakhs, crores, 
ten crores {arbuda), ten arbudas^<^ of endless future {bhdvi) mani- 
testations and absorptions to be brought about bv mdyd and thus 

S'whil" ' MaJ). 

the inilial 'f >'<= had not considered 

tivity- as beine basT'"l”^’ expansion of objec- 

doubt regarding tL T t:he possibility of the 

consciousness) and th initial (i.e. the Bhairava 

dissolution of objectivL^^'^^'^^'^I"^ expansion or 

consequently the entiti f ^ have been removed, and 
owing to which th^r * ° \ 'vould have been unknown- 

identity and non-estahl'have been the disruption of hiH 

Bhairava. This woaifKal!. ,"!)?* ?“■ State of Supreme 

of the lower pasjanti L? of the close adherence 

^he venerable para owi ^ ‘ depend on Bhairava. So 

^ould remain pard onlv continuation of such states 

ra dsa had by its verv nat Bhairava consciousness or 

antr '^ould-be object consideration- 

""or would hive would neither have 

dol:„ "°l"'hasedona«Lr‘'“'''‘*- the multitude of 

found'it^^^ of n it remain imperfect’ 

let Bhairava as the 

•»lk is norpt"'*''' h-ar th “nproved; let the so 

So this ZlT"' dilference”, all such 

living^ the ieiy Jappropriate also that the 

continl^ the of external manifestation-. 

-—-^ove towards through vimarsm^^^ 

its march ol desc^t^ 

mate, because ^J^causc He ’ u 

everything. He is dw 

manifest - present in everything. 

everything. 


Abhinavagupta 


113 


Completeness of every tattva according to the theory that every 
tattoa is an epitome: 

Thus that very last tattva, viz prthivi (earth) while maintaining 
Its character as earth hi caramo bhdgah tathdtdvat svdtmarupam 
biblirat) and holding within itself all the innumerable earlier 
tattoos (e.g., 'wa,ttr—~jala, fire— agni, etc.) as inseparable from itself, 
appearing in that form {bhdsamdno) and viewed in that aspect 
(oimr^ama; 2 a/z) is complete in itself. Its precedentalso (i.e. 
iala or water) having the posterior tattva {i.t. prthivi or earth) as 
background, being identical with the appearance and percep- 
frbility present in the earth category [vrtta-purvaparipurndbhdsd- 
^^^avimar§a-tdddtmydt) and not renouncing the completeness of its 
posterior tattva (i.e. the prthivi tattva) inevitably brings within its 
Compass the fulness of all the preceding tattoos also [svayam ca 
^^^^upandntariya katdhathakrstasvapurva-purvatarddi bhdgantard-bhogo) 
^od appearing and being carefully considered in that way is inte¬ 
gral in the same way (as the prthivitattva), Thus one by one, all 
preceding tattoos {agni —fire, etc.) not being separated from 
^beir posterior two or three ones, including within themselves Ae 
^^bghtful existence of their antecedent tattoos in accordance with 
^be non-divergence from the nature of Bhairava which has accrued 
them, are perfectly integral. Thus that category becomes a 
Very proximate to its chosen self-luminous Bhairava and that 
becoming a self-chosen abode of rest is designated Bhairava. 
who are proficient in thinking of Bhairava, become engross¬ 


ed 


^ naeditating on Him. An undivided sight from a distance o 
^ wilderness without limitation of associated objects like pon , 
^^untain, tree etc. or even with these limitations {tadvatyapi) pro 
yidiug a wholeness of vision offers a well-known means of 

Bhairava-consciousness. As Vijnanabhairava puts it. ne 

^^Id cast one’s gaze on a region in which there are no trees, or 
^^^ntain, or even wall. His mental state being without any sup- 
will then dissolve and the fluctuations of his mind will cease. 

, ‘ ^bairava, verse 60). Otherwise if there is partial perception. 
If the perception beginning with the first part of the same is 
parts (i.e., is not an integral perception), then what is t e 
\ ^^ence of Bhairava-consciousness from the other lower st^es 
^^nsciousness which are full of difference and are avowe y 


114 


Pard-Trisikd- Vivarana 


fragmentary? The difference lies in the fact that Bhairava-consci- 
ousness expressing as it does the delight of the unity of endless 
variety of existence is considered to be integral as compared with 
other states of consciousness which are fragmentary. Those who 
have received proper training and have penetrated into the divdne 
consciousness know this difference themselves. If the heart-lotus 
of some animal-hke men has not blown under the ray of grace 
falling from the highest Lord, then hundreds of \vords of mine, 
even though their hearts be pierced with sharp needle-like words 
can neither make the heart-lotus blow nor make it accomplish 
(the objective). On a (thing like) jar also, one similarly casts 
an integral look. In this case also, the indeterminate conscious¬ 
ness instantly {jhagiti) takes in a view of the jar as a whole (not 
of its constituent parts), and then forms all kinds of determinate 
ideas about it and they starting from the bearest ultimate part 
enter into the interior and the interiormost aspect and finally 
dissolve again in the indeterminate state. Therefore, there is no 
use in referring to other similar cases. Similarly in this matter 
also, the Siva principle is inherent in all cases (i.e. even in the 
earth category) as an indeterminate reality, and having the ele¬ 
gant autonomy of generating determinate states is, thouo-h itself 
beginningless, decidedly the priusof all reality. There is no clifTcr- 
ence of opinion in this matter. This Siva principle can be consid¬ 
ered complete only if it abides also in the ultimate earth cate¬ 
gory. So also, the consciousness of earth {dhard-samvit) can dis¬ 
play It as identical with central Reality in spite of its appearance 
as an object only when it is able to display the awareness of all the 
categories as inherent in the earth category. 

[The completeness o^prlhivi tattva according to vamana-jiihti i.r. 
the principle of projection. ] 

It is the essential nature of Siva which is the real state of the 
earth category {svarupa-satattvam ca asydh avaslhdnam dhardyah). 
How? By the process of projecting downwards {adhara-rrtlitaya) 
i.e. by the process of Siva’s projecting His manifestation down to 
the earth {vamanayuktyd), [The process of downward projection 
i.e. vamanayukti is described in the following words. ] 

Siva tattva expands into Sakti tattva {paripurna prasara), Bv His 
autonomy is effected a state (i.e. the state of Sadasiva) in 


Abhinavagupta 


115 


which the sense of non-difference (with manifestation) is not so 
fully established (as in Siva tattva) {tatsjsdtantrya klrpta aprarudha- 
abheda) ; with this as the preceding tattva comes into being a tattva 
in which the appearance of difference (i.e., the appearance of 
manifestation) is homogeneous with the tattva (i.e. the state of 
Isvara) {tatpurvaka-eka’-rasabheda) and there is the tattva iuddha- 
vidyd in which there is the appearance of difference (bhedavabhasa) 
(which, however, is dominated by I-consciousness); again through 
His power, there comes into being a state in which the auto¬ 
nomy of consciousness is gradually contracting, i.e. Maya {tattva^ 
va§odita sahkucdt-citsvdtantrya-sattdmaya) ; then appears the experient 
dominated by mdyd {mdyd-grdhaka or mdyd-pramdtd ) of which the 
group of five i.e., the group of the five kancukas or coverings is 
his sphere of experience (tadgrdkyacakra)^ then comes into being 
imdifferentiated pradhdna or prakrti {avibheddtmaka pradhdna i.e. 
prakrti in the state of equipoise of the three constituents), then its 
evolute buddhi tattva {dhitattva) and the evolute of buddhi tattva^ 
viz. aha}nkdra (the I-making principle) which is the origin of 
manas^ the organs of sense (jndnendriyas) and the organs of action 
{karmendriyas) and the tanmdtras or the primary elements of 
perception {tanmulakarana-purvaka tanmdtra) which expand into 
the gross elements, viz. ether, water, etc., and finally into dkard 
or earth. (Thus the real state of the earth category is the essential 
nature of Siva,) 

[The paripurnatd or completeness of prthivi (earth category 
according to grasana’-yukti or the process of dissolution. ] 

As long as the earth-category remains by dksepa i.e. {dksepenaiva) 
by the process of grasana or gradual dissolution in the previous 
categories, it indicates the own-being {svarupa) of Siva. As it 
points to the {fivc)tanmdtras by means of the five objects of sense, 
so they being suggested by it, in order to substantiate their own 
form {nijasvariipopaklrptaye) point to their earlier well-established 
oi'igins {samdksiptaprdktanaprdtisthika-mida) which again have a 
series ofuninterrupted preceding origins of their own {antaraparam- 
paranubandhisvakapurvaka-middni). It is not at all right to say that 
what is accepted as a material cause does not continue in its effect. 
It may be said in certain cases that the instrumental causes etc. 
arc somehow not connected with the effect (but this cannot be 


116 


Para-TrUika- Vivarana 


said with regard to the material cause). This has been discussed 
by me threadbare elsewhere in another treatise dealing with 
causation. A discussion of it here will only disturb the smooth 
progress of the present topic {prakrta-vighatakam). Therefore, it 
is not being discussed in detail here. 

[The following describes the series of the categories of existence 

by grasana-yukti i.e. by means of the order of absorption into 
Siva, ] 


Thus (according to the reverse order), it is at first tlie earth 
which has completeness. Then it is water which also having 
absorbed within itself the characteristics of all the taltvas appears 
and IS apprehended in completeness. It having absoibed within 
Itself the wondrous, prakaSa-vimarsa present in the earth cate^^ory 
{tadbhasavimaria-camatkaram antahkrtya) becomes complete Ijy'^the 
transmission of the samskara (residual traces) of the comnleteness 
of the earth category. Finally, the earth itself is but the inteo-ral 
divine consciousness i.e. the very Self of Siva. Thus even a limit¬ 
ed space {pradeSamalramapi) contains the entire form of Brahman 
The Sastras (scriptural texts) have declared it as their finding 
that Each (category of existence) has the characteristics 
of all the thirty-six Such is also the teaching of Spanda 

oastra (as in the folloivingverse): “When thewishing to see 
all objects by pervading them all i.e., infusing them all ^vith the 
1 ght of his conscioumess, then what is the use of sayino- much he 

wi 1 exper^nce for himself (the splendour ofthat vision)”. rSp'.K 

.11). One should lay this to one’s heart. By the last quarter 
t b ^ ^dr^” *^*^*^'^ indicated. So what else is 


(Establishment ofthe dependence of all the tattvas on Siva-tatt\-a 
by logical argument.) 


When a thing cannot exist without a particular characteristic, 
dien that particular characteristic is its very nature (svanipa) 
just as being a silama {sim£pa) meanshaving the nature of tree 
(i.e. there cannot be a siniiipa without its being a tree) When 
the expansion of the fixed order of things is set aside throuo-h the 
autonomy of the supreme Lord, then a thing may happen even 
without that which is its nature. The succeeding tattvas, earth. 


Abhinavagupta 


117 


etc. cannot come into existence without the preceding tattvas^ viz. 
water etc. Therefore, they i.e. the preceding tat Idas are the charac¬ 
teristics of the succeeding. The category of earth cannot exist 
without the category of water, for it is in the medium of firm sup¬ 
port {dhrti) only that solidity is found (and there is solidity in 
earth because of the presence of water In this way, in a regu¬ 

lar order, the (five) gross elements {bhutani) cannot exist without 
the five tanmdtras. These senses also cannot exist without the inner 


psychic apparatus consisting of buddhiy the ascertaining intellect, 
ahamkdra^ the I-consciousness and manas (the idea and image 
making faculty). AU these cannot exist without the primal, un¬ 
differentiated, compact subtle root-cause i.e. prakrti. How can 
prakrti exist without the limited experient i.e. Purusa {samvidat- 
makam ca antarena) who is fettered by the snare of time (kdla)^ 
limited efficacy etc. {kalddi) which are the characteristics of 
experience {samviddtmakam) which he has imposed upon liimself 
only by his own limitation {sankocavaMdeva ca svdtmdrohita) , How 
can there be limitation of the unlimited consciousness (i.e. how 
can there be a limited /^wrw^a) without the autonomy (of the 
Divine) which is the cause of that limitation and of which mdjd 
is another name (i.e. this limitation comes about by mdydlaktt 
which is only another name for the svdtantrya ov autonomy o 
the Divine)? This state of limitation by the divine autonomy m 
the form of mdyd does not come about without t e 
unlimited reality {isat-asankucita i.e. iuddha-didya)y un unite 
reality {asankucita i.e. Isvara), slightly expanding {isa vi 
Sadasiva) and fully expanded reaUty {vikasvara^rupam i.e. bakU J, 
standing as it does in opposition to the gradually proportiona e 
shrinkage of that whose very essence is limhlessness {c^ankucitata- 
sdratdratamydpeksi) . All these realities are simply not mg wi o 
Bhairava who is absolutely autonomous and the very qu 
sence of perfect Light. This regular order of the categories i 
admitted to be true according to one’s own ^ . 

(scriptural text) also says, where can the earth category w \ 
inclusive of water be found without its solidity, (i.e. t e so 
of the earth is due to adhesiveness and adhesiveness is no 
possible without liquid). So if we say that the eart ^ 

its preceding category, the water, how does it pertur us. n 
the contrary, it will only be in support of the supreme conscious- 



118 


Para- TrUika- Vivaraiia 

ness {para samvit) which is the perfect, omnifarious, revered 
Bhairava Himself. 

The Form of Time in the Bimba area of Para 

On the occasion of coming into existence oiparapara (supreme- 
cum-non supreme) vanl which hpasyanti and apara (non-supreme) 
which IS mtkhari, in other words, on the occasion of future and past 
times, the entire corpus of Time appearing in the three forms 
(present, past and future) in accordance with the difference of 
the categories of existence {lattvas) which are slightly distinct 

{sphutatara in madhyamd) 
and fully distinct {sphutatama m vatkhari) abides in the splendour 

o revered(the supreme transcendental consciousness) in the 

orm appropriate to para .That which is to arise (i.e. the future 
state) and also that which is the last {apara state) deci- 

stat ) Tut r" -er.present P. 

that is t ^ ^ " reference to dear difference 

kntu- r ° undifferentiated. For instance ‘The 

i (incarnation) will appear and will destroy those tvho are 

bTnlxperi"’~;';*‘^" statement referring to the future had ;ot 
expellenced m an earlier present, then how could this state¬ 
ment be made in the Puranas? If it is said that in some nrev-i" 
creation, there was kalki who destro\ ed the wicked as d ^ 'I 

Xterr/ir "T, 

one. If It IS said that he is another one, then Im^,. ic 
now that he is really another one (lit. how will it be evident to 
onsciousness?).’ If it is the same kalki, why is there a difT 

“y'.te-T I- is .t^rnd 

y me because he, being the very nature of consciousness is 
mTfbTm "'Iryisnotthe statement 

Rh;,: u’ ^ ^ in the venerable 

my hean Pt=scntc,„ the tip of my ,„„gue and in 

y eart, who is consciousness transcending the spliere of time 
w o IS perpetually inseparable from the universal Eneroy ^vho is 

fe"a bn T d ?' b..nd..eds%’f :1° i. 

anT exun appear through the contraction 

d expansion of Energy exercised by His absolute autonomy 
and who is the supreme Lord, honourably accepted \vith open 


Abhhiavagupta 


119 


eyes, or why does not one describe it in an open-thioated way 
after having ascertained the truth for oneself? 

Therefore, this fact is perfectly established that so long as iva 
who is beginningless and endless, who is self-luminous, whose 
essence is autonomy which is integral and inherently indepen¬ 
dent, who enfolds within Himself the entire multitude of c^e 
gories, whose highest truth is His own Self, who, because o is 
being eternally present, who, because of His being in haimony 
with everything, because of His conferring grace on all, abi es as 
Bhairava beyond the sphere of time, in para or supreme con¬ 
sciousness which would not tolerate even the very word of a 
particular state’ {avasthd^abda vyapadeia-asahipiau)^ so long accoi 
ing to the doctrine of this Sastra He abides in the form of total 
manifestation {mahdsrsti) , not in a succession of particular lunited 
manifestations. This is perfectly in harmony with the view ot 
this Sastra. Because of His enclosing all the categories one by one 
and the entire multitude of categories collectively in one henusp e 
rical whole {samputikarandt). He abides in the manner of a hemis¬ 
pherical bowl {sarriputayoga)—thx% is the tradition of our revered 
teachers. It will be said that ‘beginning with the stage oi pasyanti, 
there is the play of partial bondage {pdidrn^olldsah) on account o 
the commencement of difference. Therefore up to pa§yanti t e 
principle of the relationship of that which is to be puiified an t e 
purifier (Jodhya-Mhaka-bhdva) is undeniable. As has been said. 

“O virtuous one, beginning with the earth up to Sadasiva, a 
the categories are to be known as usual being connected wit 
production and destruction.” (Sv.T. V, 548). 

The Principle of Bimba-pratibimba 

Pa^yanti who has the nature of pardpard iakti (i.e. the nature of 
supreme cum non-supreme Energy) is like a mirror, constitut¬ 
ing the energy of pardiakti herself, in which pard shines as a 
reflection. That form, which is always the same both in its ori¬ 
ginal condition and reflection, is not called reflection, as the mere 
reference to the face {mukhapardmaria-mdtramioa) is not reflection, 
because of its nature being merely the original face. That, how¬ 
ever, which, though being the same, appears in another way, 
as for instance, the image of the face, in a reverse order, the front 
as the rear, the left as the right, this also and that also (i.e. as 


Para- PriHkd- Vivarana 

similar)—that alone is called reflection. That (i.e. the reflection) 
original) not dissimilar. Therefore, bara- 
natfanka {t\iQ supreme consciousness) while casting in the trans- 
p^ent mirror oi parapard who has as her essence paiyantl her 
reflecon full of ,h, ca.ogorie., earth etc.. i„ their sep^raL 
terms {apuma-prthivyadi tatlva-sdmagri nirbharam) and thus having 
a succession of separate categories {tattattathdvidhoktakramam') is 
present even in the separate categories because of her enclosing 
mwardly within herself the natural, integral, absolutely true and 
loanable apprehension of ‘ka^ and other letters {antastathdvidha- 

^f°jfrtnma.paramdrthikdnapdyikddi.pardmaria-krodikdrenaiva\ and 

displays those letters etc. in an integral way different from 
their nature. ^ nuin 

homogeneous, transparent 
rror (of pampara whose essential nature is pa.^an«) the reflec- 
on of the categories which are apprehended as earth, water 
etc and are identical with herself, by bringing about differen- 
on y means of her autonomy {tathollasadbhedasutranayd) 
then a reverse order of the categories-earth etc., is produid 

S'cLl^'^rr^fl^ {^-^-Pard) is ^akti tattva 

brthimfnf} K parapard prthtvitattva, that which is 

y, - This is the position ofetc 

in parapard from ‘yba’ upwards. ^ 

It has been declared by me many a time that there cannnt 
any change in Bhairava who is always integral, infinite and am 
nomous, for .here can never be .ly excL or di Tn 

consciousness (which is Bhairava) .*0 on j m 

6ar^a!S)^T!h”''T consciousness {paramdtmani 

P ), all the categories of existence are only of the natnr/* 

of consciousness (i.e. they are all Siva). The supreme .ruthTf 
a apprehension is the expansion ofJakti from ka to ksa. There- 
ore, m the highest consciousness (para) there is complete absence 
o 1 erence. In parapard, there is non-difference in difference 
according to the principle of reflection. When the pardpard state 
which has the form of a garland of letters from ka to ksa 
reflection the categories existing in para which is situated at a 
evel higher than itself, then of the non~mdyiya^ inaudible (to the 
gross sense), supreme k to ksa letters, the .categories {tattvdni) 
acquire a reversal of order i.e., the upper becomes lower and the 


Abhinavagupta 


121 


lower upper. The sense is that this happens through the power of 
the nature of the original (bimba) which is in the upper level, 
acquiring a lower level in reflection. So in the statement that 
‘there is prthivi tattva in ksa,^ there is no contradiction, from 
the point of view of that which is to be purified and the purifier. 
Because of the invariable continuity of the para state, even in 
that i.e. even in pardpara state there is the continuous succession 
of Afl and other letters {kadivarnasantanah). 

Because of the appearance of paiyanti in the bosom of pardy be¬ 
cause of the emergence of madhyama state within paiyardiy and 
because of the propensity of vaikhari present in her (i.e. madhyama) 
nature, (letter), mantra (word) zxidpada (sentence) success¬ 
ively arise, but these (not being purifier) remain at the level of 
iodhya (that which is to be purified).^^ However, let this matter 
alone. This is not germane to my thesis. I have conclusively 
discussed this point in Sripurva (Malinivijaya) and Pancika. 

Clarification of the State of Mdlini etc. 

Though it has been declared that according to venerable Ma- 
lini, there is a different arrangement of the letters etc., still let 
those who are devoted to the Lord {parameioarah) and whose 
knots of ignorance have been shorn asunder by the teaching of 
Trika, understand the subject imder discussion after complete 
ascertainment. That which has been said viz., that there are 
divinities, in the highest consciousness or para ^akti surpassing the 
highest point*® of paiyanti viz., the ^akti of Anasrita-Siva, should 
not be forgotten by the noble selves. 

Thus the state of madhyama iakti (i.e. paramadhyama) is being 
described which abides in the area of pardsarimity but has descend¬ 
ed to the level of pardpara. Madhyamd {pard madhyamd) within 
Her own sphere of authority which is the sphere of kriyd-^akti of 
Isvara being of the nature of containing clear objectivity (like 
jar, cloth, etc.) in a veiled form at every step superimposes the 
word in the object or referent, or object in the word. 

If the referent is universal, its denotative word has to be uni¬ 
versal. It is in such a state that the superimposition of each other 
which are of a swinging or oscillating nature {lolibhddo)'^ is pos- 

*Lolibhdva in this system is a technical word. This means that both word 
(vdcaka) and its referent {vacya) are so intimately associated that theone signi- 



122 


Pa ra-TrUika- J 'ivarana 

sible, not otherwise. A piece of cloth even if it is shorter by three 
or four fingers than another piece of cloth cannot cover it com¬ 
pletely. Word and its referent can become universal if they are 
associated together by nature. Vowels which are of the nature of 
germ {bija) and consonants which are of the nature of their 
receptacle (joni) denote Siva and Sakti respectively and, there¬ 
fore, the former is denotative and the latter is the denotated. 

As has been said: “In this realm of letter, Si\-a i.e. the group 
of vowels IS said to be bija i.e. germ or semen, and 3akti or the 
group of consonants is said to be the womb or receptacle”. 
in, 12). “The realm of letters has two aspects—( 1 ) bija and i2) 
yoni. Of these, the vowels are considered to be bija (germ) and 
the consonants beginning with ‘Z:’ are considered to I^e yoni (their 
receptacles)” (M.V. Ill, 10). Being thus described in Purva 
astra (i.e. Malinivijaya), Siva, not abandoning His nature of 
the experient, is the vacaka or the designator, and Sakti ^vho 
a ides in objectivity is the or designated. In the (common) 
woild of difference also, every vacaka or significant word is success- 
ul only when it is identified with the state of the subject in its 
W° of vowel {pratipadaka) and consonant {pratipsdya). 

e snail explain presently that the coagulation of the o-erm (bija ) 
in the form of the vowel denotative of Siva is thejcoih or womb 
enotative of the consonant in the form of Sakti, for it is because 
o he 6ija-letter or vowel that there is an expansion of the yoni- 
letter or consonant. 

Therefore, if there is union of bija (germ) in the form of vowels 
with the womb in the form of consonants, in other tvords, if there 
is the homogeneous union of Siva and Sakti, then what a plea¬ 
sant surprise; without any effort, without tilling and sowino- will 
be generated both bhoga (enjoyment) and moksa (liberation). 

The bija-vama or vowel is adequate in itself and the voni-vama 
or the consonant is equally so. Therefore, which is the cause and 
which the effect? Such argument does not disturb us who are 
making a statement about consciousness which is teemino- with 
infinite variety. Even in worldly dealings dominated hy rndya, 
speech which imparts clarity to the successive letters and words 

lies the other. .At the level of marfZl’am j, they are so identified with each other 
that one can denote the Other. This is what is meant by adhydsa in the Trika 
system. 



Abhinavagiipta 


123 


and being of the nature of light, brings about thinking and has 
the nature of bringing about a unified sense {ekapardmariasvabhd- 
vaiva). By others (the followers of other doctrines and the gram¬ 
marians) this i.e., the supreme consciousness {pardsamvid) has 
been proved by laboured deliberation. In this system, it is esta¬ 
blished effortlessly to those who earnestly take to its teaching. 
Therefore, we do not insist on one’s going to the house of a tea¬ 
cher of grammar, the only gain of which will be a little refine¬ 
ment of speech (body of words). So, (by following this Trika 
system) questions or doubts pertaining to succession or non¬ 
succession or priority and posteriority (of letters) or words in 
respect of piniamantrar^ consisting of nine letters and mahd-man- 
tras^^ are solved by themselves. 

Description of the Pattern of Mdlini 

So, revered Malini mantra alone is of the chief, supreme state of 
Sakti at the level of the intermediate state i.e. at the level of 
paiyanti situated at pardpard level. Therefore, it has been said in 
Purvasastra (Malinivijaya): 

“The knowers of mantra^ in order to achieve the desired object 
of the followers of mantra and tantra should practise in matters of 
nydsa^ the nydsar^ of Malini which is free of particular prescription 
(of rites) and has a mixed arrangement of vowels and consonants, 
for the sake of idkta body.” By this statement, it has also been 
declared that Malini has a mixed arrangement of vowek and con¬ 
sonants. At another place also, it has been said: “One should 
direct the mantra neither towards nara (i.e. limited beings and 
objective phenomena) nor to Siva, the supreme tattva, but to 
Sakti, They i.e. nara and Siva cannot bestow enjoyment and 
liberation, for nara is insentient, and Siva is powerless (for power 
resides only in Sakti).” 


Notes 

1. This book is not available now. 

2. Svapaksa means ^parapramdtr-paksa\ the supreme experient; 
parapaksa means mitapramdtr-paksay i.e. the limited empirical 
individual. 

3. Srsii pertains to kriyd, sthiti to jndncty sarnhdra to icchd. Srsti 
is the avatdra of apard sakti which is predominantly governed 


^24 Pard-Tri^ikd- Vivarana 

by jndna-sakti and samhdra of para sakti which is predominantly 
governed by icchd-sakti. 

4. Dhdrikd pervades prthim tattva, dpydyini pervades jnla tattvay 
bodhini pervades agnitattva, pamtri pervades vdyutattva and avakaJada 
pervades dkdsa tattva, 

5. The three vidyds refer to pard^ pardpard and apard, Pard is that 
which rests in the Absolute only as Will to manifest. It is only 
icchd sakti. When with jiidna sakti^ the form of manifestation is 
determined, then this mixed state of icchd ?indjndna ^akti is pard¬ 
pard vidyd. When by means of kriyd §akti manifestation is finally 
brought about, then the vidyd is known as apard. This is the em¬ 
pirical condition consisting oipramdtr (the experient, the subject), 
pramdna (experience and means of experience) and prameya (ob¬ 
ject of experience). 

6. In Siva tattda^ there is the mantra of one letter, viz. awn in 
Sakti tattva, there is the mantra of three letters, viz. aghore; in 
Sadasiva tattva there is the mantra of one letter, viz. hrim. The 
full mantra referred to is: ora aghore hrih paramaghore him ghorarupe 
hah ghoramukhi bhime bhisane vama piba he ru ru ra ra phat hum hah 
phat, 

7. The mantra of apard devi is hrirn hum phat. The mantra phat 
is of one and a half letters. This covers the prthioi anda and prakrti 
anda. The mantra hrim is also of one letter. It covers Sakti anda. 
The entire cosmos consists of the evolution of Sakti ancla in anut- 
tara, mdyiya anda in Sakti, prakrti anda in mdyd^ and prthim anda 
in prakrti. See diagram (Chart 1). 

8. This refers to the mantra Sauh. ^Sa^ represents the three cos¬ 
mic spheres {prthioi^ prakrti and mdyd) i.e. the 31 tattvas of Saiva 
philosophy from prthioi upto mdyd. represents suddhavidyd, 
IsVara and Sadasiva together with icchd, jndna and kriyd. The 
visarga (the two dots—one above the other) represents Siva and 
Sakti. This is the pervasion oipard. 

9. Matrsadbhava or Matrkasadbhava mantra is h, s, h, phrem 
(Tantra 30, 47-49), Ratisekhara mantra: r, I, y^ u (Tantra 30, 
10), Kulesvara mantra: jh, k?, hurn (Tantra 30, 16). 

10. In Agama, various ceremonies are performed for mental 
peace, physical health etc. These are known as "dpyayana'' cere¬ 
monies. 

11. By 'preta' or ‘departed’ is meant one who is not a being of 


Abhinavagupta 


125 


the terrestrial world. Sadasiva has been called ^mahdpreta^ —the 
gigantic one who is not a being of the terrestrial world, because 
other pretas i.e. other souls who have departed from this world 
(after death) still retain their sense of difference, but Sadasiva 
has absolutely no sense of difference. He is, therefore, mahdpreta. 
The use of mahdpreta for Sadasiva is figurative, the word ^praha- 
santawL (smiling) has been used for Sadasiva in order to show 
his joy in serving as a seat for para (the transcendental Sakti). 
The word ‘Isvara’ in the quotation refers to Sadasiva, not to 
livditdi-tattva. 

Sadasiva has been designated as simultaneously both ^sacctana^ 
(conscious) and ^acetana" (unconscious). He is ^sacetana" (con¬ 
scious) with reference to his identity with the transcendental 
Sakti, and acetana (unconscious) with reference to the sense of 
difference that prevails in the world. 

12. All the categories of existence have two aspects, viz. (i) 
the original orb and (ii) its reflection. Their original orb is in 
the pardiakti. No reflection has any existence unless its original 
orb (bimba ) is present in para. The supreme original orb is deci¬ 
dedly pard\ the bimbas or original orbs of the remaining vafiiSy 
viz., pa^yanti^ madhyamd and vaikhari are also present in para. In 
the quotation borrowed from Malinivijaya, it has been indicated 
that even the three goddesses, in the form of energy, viz. pard 
paiyanti^ pard madhyamd^ and pard vaikhari abide on the three lotuses 
that blossom on the three prongs which emerge from the navel 
of Sadasiva. The venerable pardiakti^ however, presides over ev'en 
the above three. 

There are the following nidtrds (morae) of pranava^ viz. m, 
bindti, ardhacandra^ nirodhi^ ndda, nddduta^ iakti^ vydpini, and samand. 
The eighth one, viz. nddanta is a state of Sadasiva. There is also 
the twelvth mdird^ viz. tinmand which constitutes the seat of the 
venerable pard that transcends all these. The three white lotuses 
with reference to pard indicate srsli^ sthiti and samhdra. Venerable 
pard is above even the urdhvakundaiuii. She is there in the form of 
divine Energy. Therefore, her sea" is described as parama dsana 
i.e. as the most distinct seat, for this seat stretches as far as pard 
Herself {pardparyantatvdt ). 

jYadanta is indication of the 8th mdtrd (e.g. //, ;w, bindu, ardlia^ 

candra, nirodhi, ndda, mldauta, sakii, vydpini^ and sainaud). jXdddfita 


126 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


points to the state of Sadasiva. The yogi experiences the 12th 
mdtrd i.e. iinmand of pranava when he has succeeded at first in dis¬ 
solving the first eleven mdtrds in cidakasa. Unmand is also called 
nrdhmkundali pada which is the special seat oipard, 

13. The grammarians believe that there are only three stages 
of ddk, viz. pasyantiy madhyama and vaikhari and consider pa§yanti 
to be the highest stage. The Trika philosophers, on the other 
hand, maintain that there are four stages of 'odk^ viz., pard^ pasyanti 
madhyama and vaikhari and consider pard to be the highest stage. 

14. The statement made in tliis paragraph will be clear from 
the following table: 

Levels of the Three Bimba Vdnis 


No. Antahkarana The bimba vdnis 
introverted 
towards the 
inner self 


Presiding State of crea- 
deity tive categories 
according to 
Trika 


1. Buddhi or 
Prajna 

2. Aharnkara 


3. Manas 


Para-pasyanti 

Para- 

Sadasiva 

Jnana-sakti as¬ 
pect of Para- 
Sadasiva. 

Para-madhyama 

Para- 

Visnu 

Kriya-sakti as¬ 
pect of Para- 
Sadasiva. 

Para-vaikhari 

Para- 

Brahma 

Kriya-sakti as¬ 
pect of Para- 
Isvara. 


15 . Pralaydkala and sunya-pramdtd are states in which the soul 
lies unconscious in sleep due to moha for a long time. There is, 
however, one difference between them. The movement of prana 
and apdna goes on in a subtle way in the sunya-pramdta till they lie 
unconscious in pralaya i.e. the dissolution of the world. The 
sancita karmas of both are, however, present as samskdras in this state. 

16. A = 100,000; a koti = laksasy an arbuda = kofis, 
a pardrdha — t\\^o arbiidas. 

17. The category of earth {prthivi tattva) is the ultimate aspect 
of manifestation. It contains all the preceding tattvas from jala 
(water) upto ^iv3.-tattva according to the principle ‘everything is 
an epitome of everything else.’ 






Abhimvagupta 


127 


18. By kdthinya or solidity is meant ‘compactness of being firmly 
or densely united’. There cannot be solidity in the earth, unless 
the earth elements are densely united with the water atoms- 
element. 

19. The para state is ever present, the Eternal Now; pardpard 
state is future; the apard state is past. The sense of ‘abiding in 
para in the form appropriate to pard^ is the following: 

In the bimba of pard^ the future and past are present in this form 
oibimba i.e. as ever-present which is the appropriate characteristic 
of pardy because in pard Time is not based on the sense of relativity 
which is the characteristic of the empirical consciousness. 


Summary of the completeness of the earth category according to the prin¬ 
ciple of SMs projection upto the earth i.e, Vamana-yukti (Involution): 


1. Complete equipoise oi Aham (I) and 
Idam (this i.e. objectivity) 

2. Expansion of Siva into A-ha-m 

3. By means of Svatantrya Sakti 

(autonomy of Siva), loss of abheda or 
non-difference, the emergence of idam 
(this) in aham (I) 

4. The incipience of subtle difference 
by a breach in non-difference 

5. Bheda (difference) and abheda (non¬ 
difference) equally balanced 

6. Shrinkage of (non-difference) 

and appearance of bheda (difference) 

7. Complete bheda or difference 

8. The empirical individual abiding 
in mdyd 

9. The progeny of Maya by which the 
empirical individual is completely 
affected 

10. The homogeneous state of 
rajaSy and tamos 

11, The first aspect or modifications 
of prakrti 


= Siva tattva 

« Sakti tattva 
“ Sadasiva tattva 


= Isvara tattva 

— Suddhavidya 
tattva 

= Mahamaya tattva 

=» Maya tattva 

= Purusa tattva 

» Kala, Vidya, Ra- 
ga, Kala and Ni- 
yati tattva 

= Prakrti tattva 

«=■ Buddhi tattva 



128 


Para- 'TrUikd- Vivarana 


12. Two aspects or modifications of 
buddhi 

13. Modification of aharnkdra tattva 

14. The primary general object of 
perception 

15. Modifications of the subtle tanma- 
tras into concrete elements 

16. The ultimate limit of the entire 
manifestation 


= manas tattva and 
aharnkdra tattva 
= The five jndnendri’- 
yas^ and the five 
karmendriyas 
= Sabda^ spar§a^ rupa, 
rasa and gandha 
tanmdtrds 

= dkd§a^ vdyii^ tejas 
jala tattva 
= Prthivi tattva 
(earth category) 


20. Bhairava Consciousness which is transcends both 

imba and pratibimba. That consciousness is represented by the 
vowels which are not amenable to the doctrine of bimba-pratibimba. 

e vowels always represent Siva on every level whether pri- 
mordial-^am or the ultimate mikharl. 

st^rlc and paiyanti-, mantra or word 

m madhyama or pardpara and pada or sentence starts in vai- 
^ <2n,or apard. Purification means that in sddhand or spiritual 

iscip me,which is in vaikharihzsto be raised to the level of 
varna m pasyantl and pard. 

oZsymiTh7-^f point refers to the antakoti 

p y^nti. The adi or initial kofi oipasyantl is hvara tattva- the 

iB mukUi B 

23. of nine letters is the following:/) <• r / 

bctweir ^ of voi;vUs’in 

worl "e svZ^,“ i" which the 

woiQs are syntactically connected. 

2o. Xyasa is a technical term. It means mental assimment of 

the various parts of the body to different deities accompanied with 

man or piayer with particular gesticulations. 

26. Sdkta-sarira: body charged with sakti or divine energy. 


Abkinavagupta 


129 


Pardpard-samvitti 

The pervasion of tattvas in Malini on the basis of Malinivijayot- 
tara Tantra. 

na, r> x\y !> ^ha, ca, dha, i, na, u, u, ba, 
ka, kha, ga—the fii'st sixteen letters are 
pervaded by §iva-§akti tattva. 


Serial 

No. 

Varna or ania 
i,e. letter 

Tattva 

1. 

gha 

Sadasiva 

2. 

ha 

Is vara 

3. 

i 

Suddhavidya 

4. 

a 

Maya 

5. 

va 

Niyati 

6. 

bha 

Kala 

7. 

ya 

Raga 

8. 

da 

Vidya 

9. 

<Jha 

Kala 

10. 

tha 

Purusa 

11. 

jha 

Prakrti 

12. 

ha 

Buddhi 

13. 

ja 

Aliamkara 

14. 

ra 

Manas 

15. 

ta 

Srotra 

16. 

pa 

Tvak 

17. 

cha 

Caksu 

18. 

la 

Rasana 

19. 

a 

Ghrana 

20. 

sa 

Vak * 

21. 

ah 

Pani 

22. 

ha 

Pada 

23. 

sa 

Upastha 

24. 

ksa 

Payu 

25. 

ma 

Sabda 

26. 

sa 

Sparsa 

27. 

am 

Rupa 

28. 

ta 

Rasa 



Pard-Trifikd^ Vivarana 


130 


29. 

e 

30. 

ai 

31. 

o 

32. 

au 

33. 

da 


Gandha 

Akasa 

Vayu 

Tejas 

Jala 

Prthivi 


Matrka (from a to ksa) 


34. 


pha 


Pardpard Samvitti 
The pervasion of tattvas in 


a, a^ i, iy u, u, r, f, ], e, ai, o, 
arn, ah 


au. 


i.e. all the vowels are pervaded by Siva tattva. The 
the tattvas by other letters of Matrka is given below: 


pervasion of 


Serial .Yo. Letters 


1 . 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17 . 

18 . 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 
22 . 


ka 

kha 

ga 

gha 

na 

ca 

cha 

ja 

jha 

ha 

ta 

tha 

da 

<iha 

na 

ta 

tha 

da 

dha 

na 

pa 

pha 


Tattvas 


Sakti 
Sadasiva 
Is vara 

Suddhavidya 

Mahamaya 

Maya 


Kala 

Vidya 

Raga 

Purusa 

Prakrti 


Buddhi 


Ahamkara 

Manas 

Srotra 

Tvak 

Caksu 

Rasana 

Ghrana 

Vak 


Upastha 

Payu 


131 


Abhinavagupta 



23. 

ba 

Pani 

24. 

bha 

Pada 

25. 

ma 

Sabda 

26. 

ya 

Sparsa 

27. 

ra 

Rupa 

28. 

la 

Rasa 

29. 

va 

Gandha 

30. 

sa 

Akasa 

31. 

sa 

Vayu 

32. 

sa 

Agni 

33. 

ha 

Jala 

34. 

ksa 

Prthivi 


Exposition 

In this section, four important points deserve attention, via. 1. 
Phonematic manifestation, 2. The principle of evolution in 
Saivagama, 3. The principle of everything being an epitome of 
everything else, 4, The state of bimba-pratibimba or the original 
orb and its manifestation. 

1. Phonematic manifestation 

According to Saivagama, vimar^a--§akti or the self-verbalising 
and the self-revelatory aspect of the anuttara or the Supreme 
consists of the eternal awareness of T’ or Aham (in Sanskrit). 
The Supreme is not simply prakdia or light of consciousness, but 
prakd^a-vimariamaya or light and energy of awareness simultane¬ 
ously which is potentially the germ and source of all manifesta¬ 
tion. Thus the Supreme is a biune principle. 

This Aham of the Supreme contains all the letters of the Sans¬ 
krit alphabet which consists of 50 letters. The 16 vowels from 
’a’ to ^aiy are forms of Energy representing the Supreme that is 
transcendent to manifestation. The remaining 34 phonemes 
which are consonants are also forms of Energy manifesting the 
various tattvas or categories of existence. So the phonemes are not 
merely inert letters, they are creative powers of the universe. The 
universe is not simply visible phenomenon of the Divine; it is the 
utterance of Pardvdk^ the verbal Power of the Divine. Manifes¬ 
tation is known as varna-srsti^ phonematic creation in Saivagama. 

The phonemes are known as Mdtrkd^ the little mothers who are 

{Continued on page 134) 



132 


Pard-’Trliika- Vivarana 


Chart 3 


THE arrangement OF LETTERS ACCORDING 
TO mAtrka in para-sam\7tti in SAR\^AGRA 

ROPATA 



In this scheme, every varna or phonen^g is complete in itself 


a—cit u—unata 

a—an an da r—amfta bij^ 
i—iccha j*—amrta 
i—isana 1—amrta bija 
u—^unmesa 1—amrta bija 


. ^^lyasakti 

ai—sputa 

^^^yasakti 
o sphutatara 
kriyasakti 


ou—sphutatama 
kriyasakti 

on—Sivabind u 

ah—Sivavisarga 




Abhinavagupta 


133 


Chart 4 

arrangement of letters according to 
mAt^lkA in parApara-samvitti in sarva 
MADHYARCPATA 




134 


Pdra-TrUika-Vivarana 


busy creating the universe and in effecting everyday activity of 
life. Matrka when realized by the soul also becomes mantra that 
saves the soul and brings about its liberation. 

2. The Principle of Evolution in &aivdgama 

This ^ction also contains the philosophy of Evolution accor¬ 
ding to Saivagama. There is in manifestation first of all the arc of 
descent of the Divine right up to the solid earth. This is the pro- 
cess of involution known as vamanayukti, the process of projection 
oi the Divine Energy in the manifestation in whicTr there is svaru- 
pairopana the veihng of His essential nature. This vamana yukti is 
given in detail m Note No. 19 in this section. This is also known 

as sTsti-krama. Every spark {jiva or soul) of the Divine Flame has 
to go into exile. 

Evolution is the reverse of involution. In this section, it has 
svanif l j^^ It is the arc of ascent, the arc of 

hdrairam^ T’ of return of the exile. It is the sam¬ 
el srstilZ Z of Odyssey. The ratio essendi 

.J d sthiti IS anugraha, the Divine grace by which every spark 
becomes conscious of the flame from which it was separaTe^ 

3. The Principle of everything being an epitome of everything else 

epitometf f everything in manifestation is an 

watTle T'" ^ contains 

all the nrecS^’’ category. So ako water contains 

preceding and succeeding tattvas or categories of existence. 

4. Bimba-pratibimba-bhdva 

essence is anut- 

bimhn ' of the Supreme, but is polarised in 

• 1 , reflection i.e. it becomes the reverse of the original as 
right becomes left and left right in the reflection of the face in the 

P<^rdpara. This is achieved by the svatantrya- 
iakti or power of autonomy oi para. This principle of reflection 
oes not apply to vowels which are always of the form of Siva 
The diagram Pratibimba or reflection in bimba shows that prthwi 
or earth category represented by the letter ^ka' is reflected as 
iakti represented by the letter ^ksa' and vice-versa. 


Abhinavagupta 


135 


For further details, see the diagrams (Charts No. 1, 2, 3, 4). 

Mdlini and Mdtrkd in relation to ^iv^,tattva in the aspect of pard. 

Text 

From evani ca sthite on p. 51, 1. 22 to samdoisfam on p. 52, 1. 8. 

Translation 

Such being the case, since everything is in everything else, 
let us, first of all, see how the first sixteen letters of Mdlini {Ihatya ), 
viz. r, f, /, tha^ ca, dha, i, na, u, u, ba, ka, kha, ga^ give an idea of 
Siva seriatim in relation to the supreme or transcendental con¬ 
sciousness. 

{parasanividam apeksya) [The pervasion of Siva in the first six¬ 
teen letters of Mdlini in the para or Supreme Consciousness on the 
basis of sarvdgrarupatd ] 

1. ‘jVii’ which symbolizes ^rotra (hearing) in Mdtrkd cakra and 
is a consonant appears in the supreme consciousness in Mdlini 
as ndda which, in other words, is akarri-pardmaria or the divine 
I-consciousness in this context. 

2. It enters the group of four phonemes {Le. r, f I, 1) which are 
the ambrosial seeds inasmuch as they are the womb of immorta¬ 
lity being the essential nature of Siva. The I-consciousness in 
the form of ndda thrives here and attains maturity {vrrjikitattvam 
avdpya), 

3. Tha in Mdlini symbolizes rasand or flavour in the group 
of Mdtfkd letters. So immediately entering this stage, the I- 
consciousness enjoys the flavour of its own nature as T’. 

4. The phoneme Va’ in Mdlini symbolizes gandha or smell in 
Mdtrkd cakra. Gandha (as is well known) is the attribute of earth. 
In the para or transcendental consciousness, gandha is symbolic of 
pratyabhijhd or recognition in the form T have always been like 
this’. 

5. The phoneme ^dha" in Mdlini symbolizes Hvak* or touch in 
Mdtrkd cakra. In its very state of self-recognition {tatraiva) the 
I enjoys the consciousness of contact with Sakti, or Spiritual 
Energy and recognizes its identity with it. 

6. The above state is known as idktam yaunaiji dhdma* or the 




136 


Para- Triiikd- Viva raija 


state of procreative Energy. Now it is established in the procrea¬ 
tive Energy through Udna bija or Siva bija represented by the 
phoneme ‘i’ in Malini. 

1. in Malini symbolizes that sense-power in Malrka cakra 
which is known as vak. This is the karana-sakti or in other words 

mdyasakti wliich is non-different from annllara. Beinp reflected in 
this. 

8. Further than the karana-sakti, there is the state of efflorescence 
(iiHmrra) indicated by the phoneme ‘w’ in Malini. This is the 
introvertive state. 


This IS followed by tlie tendency towards prasara or extension 
(jirdhvasrayana) i.e. a state of extroversion indicated by the pho¬ 
neme u in Malini. ‘ 


The phoneme ‘6a’ in Malini symholizQs'btiddhP inMatrka cakra. 
he lunction of buddhi is ascertainment. So it resorts to perfect 
self-existence in Sakti represented by buddhi 
( uddkirupam sakta yonim adhisayya) (liinting that it is not only 
ranscendent to manifestation but also immanent in it). 

symbolizes ^prthivV or solidity 
- arka cakra. Prt/nvi or solidity indicates ‘slhairya' or firmness. 

IS means that the I-consciousness attains firmness in its own 
nature as Siva. 

mvLfrZ *>™bolizes Ja/a or liquiclitv in 

svmboHr^"''’ ‘Characteristic of jala (water) is rasa ^^■hich 

is imme “ f I-consciousness 

IS immersed in its own bliss as Siva. 

■akrn'' symbolizes asni or fire in .Mdtrkd 

cakra which indicates prakdSa or light. This means that the I- 

a^Na"*"^** itself as/;raA-a/a or Light in its own nature 


vThis IS known as &iva.-tattva in parasanwilli or Supreme State) 


Exposition 

An of Mdlini to the para or transcendental 

state, Abhinavagupta brings out the following points: 

1. ^rvam sarvdtmakand—^EvcrytKnvr consists of ever> thing 
else . Tins is the basic principle. Siva is immanent in manifes¬ 
tation. Since Siva is not confined to any parlieular element, but 
IS the all-of-Realily, therefore, tliere is nothing in the univc'ise 


Abhinavagupta 


137 


which does not contain the all-of-Realily. When it is said for 
instance, that prthivi is solidity and has the attribute of gandha or 
smell, it does not mean that solidity is the only thing that is 
represented by prthivL It only means tliat solidity is predominant 
inprthiviy but it contains the other elements also in miniature. 

Trika philosophy maintains that the entire manifestation is an 
expression of para iakti or para vdk or transcendental logos. This 
para vdk is creative energy. Every letter of the alphabet represents 
energy in some form. The letters of the alphabet are arranged in 
two schemes in Trika, viz., Mdtrkd and MdlinL Mdtrkd means the 
little mother or phonematic creative energy. Mdlini literally 
means the Devi ^vho wears a mdld or garland of fifty letters of the 
Sanskrit alphabet. Mdtrkd also wears a garland of fifty letters. 
That is why sometimes Mdtrkd is called as purvamdlini and Mdlini 
is called as uttara-mdlini. But the word Mdlini is rarely used for 
Mdtrkd. Another etymology of Mdlini is ^malate viivam id Mdlini\ 
i.e. the iakd of letters which holds the entire universe within itself 
(the root ^mal* meaning ‘to hold’). 

The main difference between Mdtrkd and Mdlini consists in the 
arrangement of letters. In Mdtrkd^ they are arranged in a regular 
order, i.e. the vowels come first, and the consonants come next 
in a serial order. In Mdlini^ they are arranged in an irregular 
way i.e. the vowels and consonants are mixed and no serial order 
is observed. 

On the principle of ^sarvam sarvdtmakam\ Abhinavagupta has 
tried to show that the first sixteen letters of the Mdlini order 
represent Siva tattva just as the first sixteen vowels of the Mdtrkd 
order do. Out of the sixteen letters of the Mdlini order seven, viz., 
} y h A A w and u are vowels and as such, they are the constituents 
of Siva tattva itself. Therefore, they do not represent any out¬ 
going movement. They have only an intrinsic significance. 
f, /, /, are called amrta bija^ immortal germs or vowels, because 
they are the resting place of I-consciousness; they do not pro¬ 
duce anything; they do not change. I connotes isdnd bija or the 
power of mastery. U connotes SmmeseC or introvertive effloresence 
of knowledge, and u connotes urdhvasrayana or the tendency to 
extroversion. All these vowels are concerned only with the 
inner life of Siva. 

So far as the other nine letters of Mdlini are concerned viz.. 



138 


Para-TrUikd- T 'ivarana 

na, tha, ca, dha,iia, ba, ka, kha, ga, Abhinavagupta shows, as given 
in the translation above, that they denote, on the principle of 
^sarvam sarvatmakam', certain aspects of Matrkd order as well. 

The whole role of these si.xteen letters [oi Mdlinl) vis-a-vis 
Matrkd with reference to pard satnvid or supreme consciousness 
can be seen in Chart 5. 


y-nart o 

Letters of Malini together with their representation with re- 
erence to Supreme Consciousness or parasatnvitti: 

^iv at at tv a 

Letters of Malini Symbolic of Symbohc of aspects in 
aspects in Siv'a 

Matrka scheme 


Tha 


Ca 


Gandha—Smell 


. Srotra-Hearing Nada as I-consciousness 

[t, f, /, /-Amrtabija as a mass of Cidananda of Siva ] 

Rasana—Flavour The joy of Siva’s realiza¬ 
tion as I 

Pratyabhijha or Recogni- 
of I‘Consciousiiess 
^ Spaisa Touch Identity of I-consciousness 

with Sakti 

I [Is'ana bija indicating Siva’s autonomous staying in His 

nature ] 

Vak-Speech Siva’s reflection as I in vak 
[Unmesa indicating introvertive state of knowledge and 
bliss in Siva ] 

[urdhvasrayana or tendency to extroversion in Siva ] 


Na 

U 


u 

Ba 


Ka 

Kha 

Ga 


Buddhi 
PrthivI—solidity 
Ap—Liquidity 
Agni—Light 


Confirmation of I- 
consciousness 
Firmness in I-con¬ 
sciousness 

Taste of the bliss of I- 
consciousness 
Primordial Light of 
Consciousness as Siva 





Abhinavagupta 


139 


MMini and Matrka in Relation to Parapara i.e., Supreme- 

Cnm-Non-Supreme Consciousness: 

Text 

From paiyantirupdnusrtyd to bhavati on p. 52, 1. 10 to 1. 20 
Translation and Exposition 

In accordance with pcdyanti^ that is to say, in pardpara or 
supreme-cum-non-supreme state, 

1. JVfl of Mdlini which represented §rotra or hearing in Mdtrkd 
in the para or supreme state and ndda in Siva tattva in the same 
state is reflected as na in Mdtrkd in the pardpara or supreme- 
cum-non-supreme state. J^a in the Mdtrkd scheme represents 
vdk (speech or sound), the faculty of intuitive comprehension 
{grahandtmaka-ruparn)^ symbol of I-feeling in Siva tattva. 

Now this I-feeling expands, i.e. gets strengthened in the amftar 
fii/a or the ambrosial VO web Tyfihl (tattraiva bijem prasftya). Of 
thb, there is no reflection or transformation. 

2 Tha of Mdlini which represented rasand or taste in Mdtrkd 
in the supreme state and dnanda rasa or the rapture of bliss in Siva 
tattva in the same state is reflected as da in Mdtrkd in the pardpara 
state. Da in the Mdtfkd scheme in this state represents the faculty 
of seeing {cdksusydm bhuvi) and sdksdtkdra or self-awareness in 
Siva tattva. 

3. Ca of Mdlini which represented gandha in Mdtrkd in the 
supreme state and self-recollection in Siva tattva in the same state 
is reflected as ^vd* in Mdtrkd in the pardpara state. Va in the 
Mdtrkd scheme in this state represents mdyd which here means 
pure mdyd-iakti united with Siva {tatsarndnyaiuddhavidyd kararie). 
In Siva tattva^ it represents svdtantrya iakti^ the autonomous power 
of Siva. (It should be borne in mind that hiddhavidya in this 
context does not mean iuddha-vidyd-tattva but mdyd^ not mdyd in 
the ordinary sense of rndyd-tattva^ but as the mdyd-§akti or svdtan¬ 
trya of Siva. It is in this sense that the word mdyd has been used 
in the following verse by Utpaladeva in Isvara-Pratyabhijna- 
ELarika: 



140 


Pa rd- Triiikd- Vivarana 

“Svdngrupesu bkdvesu patyurjnanam kriyd ca yd mdydtrtiye te eva 
pasoh sattvarp. rajas-tamah” (IV. 1.4). 

“What are admitted to be knowledge and action of the Lord in 
relation to objects which are identical with Him, the same 
together with the third, the mdya are the three gunas of the 
limited subject, viz. sattva, rajas, and tamasP) 

4. The letter ‘dha' in Mdlini which represented tvak or touch in 
Mdtrkd in the supreme state and svarupasparia or self-contact in 
$>iva-tattva in the same state is reflected as ‘/a’ in Mdtrkd in the 
pardpara state. ‘Tiz’ in Mdtrkd scheme in this state represents the 
last in order of the external senses viz., ghrdma or the faculty of 

smelling. In Siva tattva, it represents pratyabhijnd or self-recogni¬ 
tion. ^ 

5. / in Mdlini symbolizes hdna bija or the svara (vowel) repre¬ 
senting autonomy of Siva (here also, there is no reflection or 
transformation). The aham-mmarSa or I-feeling holding the pre¬ 
vious state fast with the power of autonomy {iSdnabijam dkramya) 
proceeds to the next step. 

6 The letter 'na' in Mdlini which represented ^vdk’ in Mdtrkd 
in the para or supreme state and svarupa ndda da§d in Siva tattva is 
reflected as ‘na’ or irotra sahti, the faculty of hearing in Mdtrkd 
in the pardpara state {irotralaktim dlambya) and represents angikrtd 
naaa-dasd or acceptance of ndda state in Siva tattva. 

7. C/’ in Mdlini only represents unmesa or inner efflorescence 
as in/)ara state (of this, there is no reflection or transformation). 

Similarly a in Mdlini only indicates urdhvdirayana or the 
tendency to exteriorization. (Of this also, there is no reflection ) 
{unmesordhvabija-yogena). With the aid ofand ‘s’, aham-vimarsa 
proceeds to the next step. 

The letter ‘6a’ in Mdlini which represented ^btiddhi’ in Mdtrkd 
m the para state, and svarupa-nikaya i.e. Self-certainty or self- 
assurance in Siva tattva is reflected as ‘/6a’ in Mdtrkd in pardpara 
s ate, lha in the Mdtrkd scheme in pardpara state represents 
pdyu or rectum (dnandendriya-yoni), the seat of sexual pleasure, the 
symbol oisankoca-vikdsa, contraction and expansion or ingress and 
egress {p'^dTidendTiyayonigaiu ). 

8. The letterin which representedor solidity 
in Mdtrkd in the pard state and firmness in Siva tattva is reflected 


Abhinavagupta 


141 


as ksa in Mdtrkd in the pdrdpara staXe. ^Ksa* here represents iakti- 
cum-saddHva {Saddsiva-maya-iakti)^ according to sarvdntyarupatd. 

The letter '‘khd! in Mdlini which represented water in Mdtrkd 
in the para state and delight in Siva tattva is reflected as ‘Aa’ in 
Mdtrkd in the pardpara state. here represents Sadasiva cum 
Isvara {livara-maya-Sadasiva) {nccordin^ to sarvdntyarupatd). 

The letter in Mdlini which represented fire in Mdtrkd in 
para state and prakd^a or light in Siva tattva is reflected as ^sa^ in 
Mdtfkd in the pardpara state. ^Sa^ here represents iuddhavidyd- 
cum-hvara {Suddhavidyd^maya hvara) (according to sarvdntya- 
rupatd). 

The last three steps denote what is meant by ^"saddlive^ve^vara- 
iuddhavidydmayam bhavatV^ in the text. 

Thus it has been said here that Siva tattva is of infinite power 
{ananta-iakti) inasmuch as it is unlimited, appearing as it does in 
sarvdgra, sarvamadkya, and sarvdnta-gdmi phases. 

Exposition 

In the previous description, Abhinavagupta has shown how 
the various phases of naddtmaka I-consciousness represented by the 
first sixteen letters of Mdlini are represented in the Mdtrkd order 
with reference to para or supreme state of Siva tattva. 

In this, he has shown how the various phases of aharn-vimaria 
of Siva tattva represented by the first sixteen letters of Mdlini 
are represented in the Mdtrkd order wdth reference to pardpara^ 
sanivitti or supreme-cum-non supreme state of Siva tattva. 

Of the sixteen letters, seven viz. r, f, /, 7, /, ii and u are bija letters 
or vowels. As such, they are aspects of Siva both in Mdlini and 
Mdtfkd and therefore undergo no change. They have the same 
function in pardpara as in para. 

The phonemes, according to Trika philosophy, have three 
aspects: sarvdgrarupatd, sarva?nadhyarupatda,ndsarvdfitagdmitd. Sarvd- 
grarupatd refers to a phoneme as it is in itself. Sarvamadhyatd refers 
to phonemes undergoing transformation, and sarvdntagdmitd re¬ 
fers to phonemes reaching finally the state of Saddhavidyd^ Uvara^ 
Saddsiva and Sakti. 

Six consonants of Mdlini^ viz. na, tha^ ca^ dha^ na and ba are 
reflected in Mdtrkd in different phonemes in pardpara state under 
the law of sarvamadhya-rupata as shown in the chart. 



Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 

'Three consonants of viz* kci^ kho. snd nfter under* 

going the changes into ksa, ha, and sa respectively under the law 
of sarva-madhya-rupatd point to the final destiny, viz., of passing 
into iuddhavidya, ISvara, Sadasiva, and Sakti. They, therefore, 
refer to sarvdntagamitd state. Ka which represents prthivi in Mdtrkd 
is reflected into ksa which symbolizes Sakti, but in the pardpara 
state, it is not simply Sakti but saddiivamaya-Sakti. The pardmarSa 
or comprehension of Sadafiva is ahani idam (I am this, the 
unity of subject and object); the pardmaria of Sakti is only 
aham or I, for in para state, there is no idam or objectivity sepa¬ 
rately; everything is only I or aham. Since this is a description of 
pardpara state, therefore, ksa or Sakti is described as SaddSiva- 
maya-Sakti. Similarly, 'ha' which represents Sadas'iva is in pard¬ 
para state hvara-maya-saddiiva. Similarly 'sa' which represents 
Isvara is in pardpara state §uddhavidydmaya-hvara. 

Thus the pervasion of Siva full of invariable and infinite Sakti 
IS described through the first sixteen letters in the order of the 
letters of the Mdlini group from the point of view oi sarvdgrarupatd 
{parasarrivitti) and sarvamadhyarupatd and sarvdntyarupata (pard- 
parasamvitti), 

The mixture of the remaining tattoos of Mdlini in apard sarnvitti 

Text 

From mdUnydmihatya on p. 52, 1. 22 up to prthivi ca pha on 
p. 53, 1. 10. 


Translation 

Now the phonemes are described with reference to apara (non- 
supreme) state in Mdlini and their reflections with reference to 

^afj»a«fi-i.e./>ara^am(supreme-cum-non-supreme)state.‘GAa’which 

represents Sadakhya or Sadasiva in Mdliniinth& apara state appears 
as vdyu (the element of air) in Mdtrkd in the pardpara state. (The 
same process should be understood successively in the case of all 
the letters. The description of each letter is given in Mdlini in 
apara sanivith and of the corresponding letter in Mdtrkd in pardpara 
sarrmitti or pasyanti). JVa which represents Isvara in the apara 
state in Mdlini is reflected as nabha i.e., dkdia or ether in Mdtrkd 
m the pardpara state. T’ which represents iuddhavidyd of the apara 

{Continued on page 144) 


Abhinavagupta 


143 


Chart 6 

PARASAMVITTI (SUPREME CONSCIOUSNESS )- 
SARVAGRAROPATA 

In this every tativa or category of Existence is complete in itself. 
Letters in order of mdtfkd 


sarv3grarQpata 

'akti 

sadaiiva ha > 

IsVara sa 
^uddhavidya $a / 
mah§maya <a / 

5vaiantrya-maya va / 
kala kaia la / 
vidya ra / 
raga-niyati ya I 
puru$a ma I 
prakrti bha \ 
buddhi ba \ 
ahaqikara pha \ 
manas pa \ 
srotra na 
tvak dhaX 
cakju da 


Explanation of the vowels which are of the nature of Siva: 
a denotes cit or consciousness 
d denotes ananda or bliss 

i denotes iccha or will to manifest, but still unaffected by ob¬ 
jectivity 

i denotes isana or mastery. This is the state in iccha or will 
which is coloured by objectivity 
u denotes unmesa or jfiana^akti (power of knowledge) 

U denotes unata or deficiency of knowledge, the cause of ob¬ 
jective appearance 

^) denotes amrtabija, imperishable letter, not subject to any 
change 

e denotes asphuta kriyasakti or indistinct power of activity 
ai sphuta kriyasakti or distinct power of activity 
0 sphutatara kriyasakti or more distinct power of activity 
an sphutatama kriyasakti or most distinct power of activity 
arp, denotes Siva-bindu or undivided knowledge of the universe 
ah denotes visarga represented by two perpendicular dots. The 
lower dot, symbolizing Sakti, means that there is an expansion 
of an objective world. The upper dot, symbolizing $iva, means 
that the entire universe rests in the I-consciousness of Siva 



ka prthivl 
kha jala 
ga agni 
gha vayu 
lia 3k3sa 
ca gandha 
cha rasa 
ja rOpa 

jha sparki 

Aa sabda 
(a upastha 
|ha pdyu 
p3da 

^ dha papi 
na vak 
ta ghrSpa 
tha rasaiU 



144 


Para-Trisikd- Viuarana 


state in Mdlini appears as icchd §akti in pardpara state. 'A' which 
represents mdyd in the apard state in Mdlini represents amittara (the 
unsurpassable Absolute) in Mdtrkd, ‘Fa’ which is riiyali in Mdlini ht- 
comes mdyd in Mdtrkd, ^Bha" which is kdla in Mdlini becomes prakrti 
in Mdtrkd, which is rdga in Mdlini becomes niyati in Mdtrkd, 
which represents vidya in Malini becomes pdda in Mdtrkd. 

'Dha' in Mdlini which represents kald becomes pdni in Mdtrkd. 
Tha which represents puriisa in Malini become pdyu in Mdtrkd. 
"Jha' which represents prakrti in Mdlini becomes sparsa in Mdtrkd. 

which represents dhi or buddhi in Mdlini becomes sabda in 
Mdtrkd. "Ja' which represents ahamkdra in Mdlini becomes rupa 
in Mdtrkd. Ra which represents manas in Mdlini becomes vidyd in 
Mdtrkd. "Ta" which represents srotra in Mdlini becomes upas tha in 
Mdtrkd. Pa which represents tvak in Mdlini becomes manas in 
Mdtrkd. ^Cha^ which represents caksu in Mdlini becomes rasa in 
Mdtrkd. La which represents rasand in Mdlini becomes kdla in 
Mdtrkd. A which connotes anandasakti in Siva in Mdtrkd repre¬ 
sents ghrdna in Mdlini. 'So' which represents vdk in Mdlini re¬ 
presents Isvara in Mdtrkd. Ah is the visarga sakti of Siva and 
represents pdni in Mdlini. Ha which represents pdda in Mdlini 
becomes'Sadasiva in Mdtfkd. Sa which represents pdyu iii Mdlini 
becomes iuddhavidyd in Mdtrkd. 'Ksa' which represents uba^tha in 
becomes Sakti in MmU. -Ma' which In 

Mahni becomes purusa in Malfka. &a which represents sparsa in 
Mahni becomes mahamaya in Matrkd. Am is Siva’s bindu sakti and 
represents rupa in Malini. Ta represents rasa in Mdlini and ap¬ 
pears as ghrdna {ndsikd) in Mdtrkd. E which is the sdtvika kriydsakti 
of Siva represents gandha in Mdlini. The same in its lono- form 
i.e., as Ai represents nabha or ether in Mdlini. Similarly, O re¬ 
presents vdyu and Au represents tejas or agni in Mdlini. (In 'Mdtrkd 
e, ai, 0 and au being of the very nature of Siva cannot undergo 
any modification). 'Da' in Mdlini represents dp or water and 
becomes caksu in Mdtrkd. Pha represents prthivi in Mdlini and 
becomes ahairikdra in Mdtrkd. 

Exposition 

In the first two descriptions of Mdlini with reference to para 
and pardpara state of Siva tattvOy Abhinavagupta has selected only 

{Continued on page 147) 


Abhinavagupta 


145 


Chart 7 

IN parApara samvitti—supreme-cum-non- 
SUPREME CONSCIOUSNESS SARVAMADHYA- 
RtJPATA IN THE ORDER OF MATRKA-LETTERS. 



In this, the categories are related mutually in the middle state 



146 


Para- TrUika- Vivarana 


Chart 8 


ARRANGEMENT OF LETTERS ACCORDING TO 

mAtrka in parapara samvitti in 

SARVANTYA-ROPATA 



In this every succeeding category absorbs within itself 
the preceding one. 



Abhinavagupta 


147 


the first sixteen letters which in the Mdlini phase are concerned 
with Siva. 

In the para state, the seven vowels, viz. r, f, /, /, i, u and u undergo 
no change. The first four vowels are the resting place of I- 
consciousness. I connotes Siva’s power of autonomy, and u and U 
indicate His introvertive and extrovertive states. The other nine 
letters which are consonants show the relationship of Mdlini and 
Mdtfkd and the expansion of I-consciousness in various phases. 

In pardpara state, Abhinavagupta shows how the nine con¬ 
sonants of Mdlini are reflected in different letters of Mdtrkd which 
point to different aspects of I-consciousness. Both have to do with 
the I-consciousness of Siva. Only they show the expansion of I- 
consciousness in different ways. So both are concerned with Siva 
tattva. In the aparada^d of Mdlini^ it is the modification of the 
remaining thirty-four letters of Mdlini which has been depicted. 
In the para-daidy it is only the expansion of Siva’s I-consciousness 
that has been described. There the phonemes are concerned only 
with Siva’s inner life, not with mamfestation. That is where it is 
known as para-da^d. In the apara-daid of Mdliniy the phonemes are 
concerned with the tattvas and their modification. In other words, 
they are concerned with manifestation. That is why this state is 
known as apara or non-supreme. Their corresponding modifi¬ 
cation is shown in the pardpara state in Mdtrkd. In the apara state 
in Mdlini, the seven vowels i.e. a, ah. arrt, e, ai, o, au represent 
tattvas or elements of manifestation but they represent only diff¬ 
erent ^aktis of Siva in Mdtrkd ; they do not represent elements of 
objectivity there. So there is no question of their corresponding 
modification in Mdtrkd. (See chart 9 for details.) 

Chart 9 

Mdlini in apara sarrivitti Mdtrkd in pa§yanti or pardpara 

sarrwitti 


1. 

Gha—Sadasiva 

1. 

Gha—^Vayu 

2. 

l^a—Isvara 

2. 

Na—Nabha or Aka^a 
(ether) 

3. 

I—Suddhavidya 

3. 

I—Iccha of Siva 

4, 

A—Maya 

4. 

A—^Anuttara 



148 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


5. 

Va—Niyati 

5. 

Va—Maya 

6. 

Bha—Kala 

6. 

Bha—Prakrti 

7. 

Ya—Raga 

7. 

Ya—Niyati 

8. 

Da—^Vidya 

8. 

Da—Pada 

9. 

Dha—Kala 

9. 

Dha—Pani 

10. 

Tha—Purusa 

10. 

Tha—Payu 

11. 

Jha—Prakrti 

11. 

Jha—Sparsa 

12. 

Na—Dhi or Buddhi 

12. 

Na—Sabda 

13. 

Ja—Aharnki'ta 

13. 

Ja—Rupa 

14. 

Ra—Manas 

14. 

Ra—Vidya 

15. 

Ta—Srotra 

15. 

Ta—Upastha 

16. 

Pa—Tvak 

16. 

Pa—hlanas 

17. 

Cha—Caksu 

17. 

Cha—Rasa 

18. 

La—Rasana 

18. 

La—Kala or Kala 

19. 

A—Ghrana 

19. 

A—Anandasakti of Siva 

20. 

Sa—Vak * 

20. 

Sa—Is vara 

21. 

Ah—Pam 

21. 

Visarga Sakti of Siva 

22. 

Ha—Pada 

22. 

Ha—Sadasiva 

23. 

Sa—Payu 

23. 

Sa—Suddhavidya 

24. 

Ksa—Upastha 

24. 

Ksa—Sakti 

25. 

Ma—Sabda 

25. 

Ma—Purusa 

26. 

Sa—Sparsa 

26. 

S a—M ahainay a 

27. 

Ain—Rupa 

27. 

Ain Siva’s Bindusakti 

28. 

Ta—Rasa 

28. 

Ta—Ghrana 

29. 

E—Gandha 

29. 

L Asphuta-kriyasakti of 
Siva 

30. 

Ai—Nabha or ether 

30. 

Ai—Sphuta-kriyasakti of 
Siva 

31. 

O—Vayu 

31. 

O Sphutatara-kriyasakti of 
Siva 

32. 

Au—Tejas or^fire 

32. 

Au—Sphutatama-kriyasakti 
of Siva 

33. 

Da—Jala 

33. 

Da—Caksu 

34. 

Pha—Prthivi 

34. 

P ha—^Aharnkara 


Text 


From atraiva cayathoktam on p. 53,1. 11 upto iti after iesa varna- 
stukevaldh on p. 54, 1. 11. 


Abhinavagupta 


149 


Translation 


In these very letters of Mdliniy the structure of the iakta^iarira 
has been described (in Malini-vijaya) for the purpose of nydsa 
(mental assignment of the various parts of the body to tutelary 
deities by placing one’s fingers on them). Thus the principle 
that ‘everything else is in everything’ has been completely demon¬ 
strated. It is the venerable supreme verbum {para vdk) which, 
according to the principle enunciated, casting its reflection in 
pa§yantl^ simultaneously attains in madhyamd established as 
identical with itself a form of letters in which consonants are 
intermingled with vowels in an irregular order, and thus becomes 
Mdlini itself which is characterized by difference in the reckoning 
of the various vowels {kula~purtisa^ and the various consonants 
(i.e. kulaiakti indicated by the word ddi) in innumerable ways 
owing to the endless diversity of intermixture of consonants {yoni) 


and vowels {bija). As has been said: 

“One should worship Mdlini whose corpus is constituted by a 
group of many vowels {kuladeha)^ and consonants {kulaiakti). 

By adopting this practice, the yogi who is engrossed in the 
practice of repeated meditation acquires supernormal power in 
respect of various bhuvanaSy tattvas, centres of energy in the body 
{idriresii cakresu)^ everywhere in respect of body a.nd prd^a.^ 

As certain medicines produced by the mixture of certam ingre¬ 
dients bring about certain result, even so bhdvand (religious dis¬ 
cipline) by intermingling certain religious practices, e.g. mantra 
(repetition of a sacred word of power), nydsa (mental assign¬ 
ment of various parts of the body), homa (oblation) etc., brings 
about the attainment of certain ^spiritual power. Even here the 
success comes about by the hon-transgression of the working o 


niyati-iakti? 

In every sacred literature, the assemblage of letters (in a 
mantra) has been brought about differently by placing the letters 
in different arrangements. This has been done in accordance with 
certain fixed succession {niyataparipdpi) determined by the pre¬ 
dominance of certain letters considered as appropriate according 
to the vijhdna^ of each Sastra {nijanija vijndna^samucita^tattad^varna^ 
bhaffaraka prddhdnyena). It is in this way that a mantra is selected 
and presented, to show how pard^ (inclusive of Mdtrkd and 



150 


Para-TrUikd- Vivarana 


Malini) imparts radiance to a nzanfra invigorated by its creative 
energy (tdmeva matrka-rupdm tathavidhaviryada-anopabrmhita mantra- 
sphurattadayinini dariayiluin ). 

As has been said in Nityatantra, the arrangement of letters in 
Malini beginning vnth ‘na’ and ending with ‘pha' has been deter¬ 
mined principally in accordance with their state in para nada, 
i.e. parapaSyanti.^ In Malini, the aim of placing the vowels 
(kulapurusa) and consonants (kulaJakti) in this intermixed form is 
this very penetration into paranada or pard-pasyanti. It is not 
simply the mystery-mongering of the letters and mantras that 
constitutes their advantage. As in Vajasaneyatantra, after plac- 
ing the letters in their proper order, it is said: 

This is the divine order of letters oiMdtrkd, which has reached 
the abode of Visnu i.e. this is the Mdtrkd-cakra which has reached 
the infinite space of Mdlini. When it is fully, understood from the 
teaching of the garw (the spiritual director), it cuts asunder the 
noose of the hmited, empirical man.” 

Similarly, it is said in Trikahrdaya: “It is the power of the 
weapons or of anything else, that matters. So also, it is not only 
the position of the letters of a mantra, but the power of creative 
energy that is inherent in it that matters. It is by being preserved 
with that creative energy, that the mantras are really preserved 
ot erwise (i.e. without the creative energy) what remains con¬ 
stitutes merely a number of letters.” 


Notes 

difference of kulabheda or kulapurusa i.e., vowels and 
Kofa iz I.e. consonants appears in three ways:—(a) Vamabheda 
\ letters i.e., vowels and consonants, (b) Man- 

ra e a, i.e. difference of mantras having no vowels and mantras 

SZf.T! ; i-'- difference of k,dap^„sa as 

siddhas and kulu^ajcti z.% yoginis, 

2. Stddht in bhuvanas or spheres means that once a yoei has 
acquired power over a particular bhuvana, he is no longer born in 
t at particular bhuvana. So also siddhi over a particular tattva or 
ca egory of existence means that he has arisen above that cate¬ 
gory of existence. Siddhi over the cakras means that if a yogi has 
acquired control over a particular cakra, he will no lono-er be 
governed by the forces of the cakras below it. 


Abhinavagupta 


151 


3. Niyati-iakti, It is a technical term which means that the 
success in a certain supernormal power depends on the controlling 
power of the Divine. 

4. Vijndna is a technical term here meaning the name of the 
mantras and their structure. 

5. According to tradition, Mdtrkdrupdrn means mdtrkd-mdliniru^ 
pdrp, pardy i.e. pard inclusive of Mdtrkd and Mdlinu 

6. According to tradition, parandda means pard~pafyanti in its 
aspect of bimba or matrix, paraparandda denotes pardmadhyamd in 
its aspect of matrix, and aparandda denotes pard vaikhari in its 
aspect of matrix. 


Text 

From tathd hi mantrdndm on p. 54,1. 11 upto vidhirdnantya-vedane 
on p. 54. 1. 25. 


Translation 

1. Even when the letters of the mantras are considered by them¬ 
selves, and not in any other aspect, those very mantras have diff¬ 
erences {anyathdtvarn) in the Sastras in accordance with the 
division of dnavay idkta and idmbhava updya?‘ 

2. There is a difference in the seminal mantra of mdydy viz.: 
hrirfi delineated in Saiva Sastra, of pranava or ^oriC delineated in 
Vaisnava S^tra, of the immortal germ of the heart {amrtabija) 
which includes all the tattvas^ viz. ^sauh* delineated in the Sastras 
of the left-hand path,^ or there is a difference in the pranava mantra 
(lit. the four aspected mantra) in the Vedic scripture (where it 
is OM), and in Kaulottara etc. i.e., the Sakta Tantras (where 
it is hrirri)y and in the Ucchusma or Bhairava Sastra (where it is 
hurp).^ 

Here is recorded the rule of the use of the mantras for the worthy 
practitioners o£yoga in respect of the manifold differences of vowels 
{kulapurusa) and consonants {kula§akti). “All the vowels {purve) 
should be placed before {apare) the consonants {paresdrp) and 
the consonants {pare) should be placed after {prstha) the vowels, 
and the vowels {purve"pica) should be placed in regular succession. 
This is considered to be the rule of the use of Mdtrkd mantra.^* 

Thus also should be made the form (of the other i.e., Mdlini) 



152 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


with an inter-mixture {hhinna-yoni) of vowels and consonants. 
This goddess Mdlini with the combination of various consonants 
etc, {saktadi) becomes innumerable {asamkhyd). It is still known 
as Para or Anuttara Mdlini, 

Further, ‘Tn the mantras {dhdmasu) consisting of halanta letters 

i.e. consonants without any vowel {bhedasamkhyem)^ placed one 
below the other {adho^dho vinivistesu), there is only one dot (bindu) 
on the final letter. In the others i.e., the mantras which consist of 
letters with vowels, there is a dot on each previous letter {anyesu 
prdk). In such kind of mantras^ each mantra {ekatah) should be 
cast by placing a dot {samkhyd) on the top of each letter {svaprstha- 
gdrn) both on the previous letters and the final one {prdktand 7 itya- 
gdm). Thus the dot will differ in the case of mantras the letters of 
which are without a vowel {istaihi) and those which are with a 
vowel {asprstaihi). This is the order of such mantras. This is the 
rule {vidhi) of the combination of vowels {kulapurusa) and con¬ 
sonants {kidasakti) as has been described above {yathoktah) in 
order to point out the infinity of such mantras {dnatityavedane) 

Exposition 

In this, Abhinavagupta mentions the follotving important points 
about the mantras: 

1- In spite of the similarity of letters, they become different 
when used for different updyas. When a mantra is used as dnava 
upaya^ it is prdna-apdna or kriydsakti that is predominant. When 
It is used as sdktopdya^ it is jndnasakti that is predominant. When it 
used as sdmbhavopdya, it is icchd sakti that becomes predominant. 

2. There is a difference in the seminal In the Vaisnava 

astras, it is OM; in Saivasastras, it is Anm; in the left-hand 

Sastras, it is sauh, 

3. There is a difference in pranava itself in the differpnt 

In the Vedic scriptures, it if ‘OM’; in the Sakta rntraT 
hrirn\ in the Bhairavasastra, it is hurn, 

4. Again, there are differences in the formation and the 
arrangement of the letters in a particular order. The first verse 
cited, beginning with purveparesdm etc. shows the difference of 
arrangement of letters in Mdtrkd and Mdlini, In this verse, the 
word ^purva" has been used for vowel, and the word ^para" has 
been used for consonant. The verse says that in Aldtrkd, all the 


Abhinavagupta 


153 


vowels should be placed in regular succession. In Mdlini there is 
an inter-mixture of vowels and consonants. 

The second verse cited, beginning with ^adho^dho* contains very 
archaic Sanskrit words in a technical sense. Bhedasamkhyd has been 
used for halant letters, dhama has been used for mantra^ samkhyd 
for bindu or a dot etc. For details, see the translation. In this 
quotation, Abhinavagupta gives an example of two kinds, of 
mantras. The first is that in which (i) halanta letters i.e. conso¬ 
nants without any vowel are placed one below the other, and 
(ii) in which there is a bindu or dot only on the final letter which 
has a vowel. The following navdtma mantra is an instance of this 
kind of mantra. Such mantras are known as samyuktdksari mantras^ 
For instance: h or: A, s, r, ks^ m^ /, y, j^, num 

s 
r 

ks 

m 

I 

V 

y 

iiurp. 

Tfie other is that kind of mantra in which each consonant has a 
vowel and there is a dot {bindu) on each letter, e.g. rarriy larfiy 
varfi. Such mantras are known as asaijiyuktdksari mantras. 

Text 

From tadetena on p. 55,1. 1 upto padamanamayam^ on p.55,1. 6. 

Translation 

Thus, in accordance with this precept, those spiritual practi¬ 
tioners who are devoted to the right rules of vowels {kulapurusa) 
and consonants {kulcdakti) of the mantras^ e.g. Mantramahesvaras 
(beings always steeped in the essential nature of Siva) become 
unqualified (to impart mantra to others); they cannot impart 
mantra for deliverance, for a mantra from them cannot bear fruit. 
This does not apply to Mantras^ for even when they are completely 
absorbed in meditation, they do not reach the extreme state of 
andmaya in which one loses one’s personality in Siva.^ 

It has been rightly said: 


154 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


^‘In this world in which beings come into existence right from 
Brahma upto a tuft of grass, three and a half crores of mantras 
appointed by Siva (for helping creatures) are quite enough. 
After conferring grace on the entire lot of creatures, they have 
reached the andmaya state i.e. the state of being completely im¬ 
mersed in Siva. In other words, they have become Mantramahe- 
svaras.” (M.V.T. I, 40-41) 


Notes 

1. Mantramahesvaras are the divinities who abide in Sadasiva 
tattva^ Mantresvaras abide in Isvara tattva^ and Mantras are the 
divinities who abide in Suddhavidya. Mantra in this context 
means a divinity, not a sacred word of power. 

Text 

From tadevam bhagavati on p. 55, 1. 7 upto evarri yo vetti tattvena 
ityadi on p. 57, 1. 22. 


Translation 

The goddess para vak who assumes different states (i.e. the state 
oipaJyantiy madhyama etc.) becomes in her chief mode i.e. madhyama 
(i.e. parapard state) goddess MalinI herself. At this stage. She 
becomes so infinite, that considering the varied forms which 
She assumes she appears omnifarious, and thus being of all forms. 
She assumes the state of letter {varna), a word {mantra) and sen¬ 
tence ipada) through the predominance of three aspects viz. 
para (supreme), pardpara (i.e. subtle or suksma) and apara (gross 
or sthula) i.e. even in pardpara state. She appears as para, pardpara 
{suksma) and apara (gross).i This threefold aspect should be 
regarded from the standpoint of effecting purification. The 
sources of bondage appearing in paSyanti are indeed subtle. They 
have to be purified in their subtle aspect, for the sources of bon¬ 
dage are lying within. The sources of bondage at the pasyanti level 
are subtle; therefore their purification has to be effected at the 
subtle level, for a bondage is bondage when it lies within the 
subtle aspect. At the level of madhyama in which the external 
expansion of Sakti becomes more and more perceptible, pasyanti 
appears as an instrument of purification {hdhana-karana-tayaiva 
bhavati). 


Abhinavagupta 


155 


Just as by washing the dirt or impurity lying in the inner fold 
of a cloth, the dirt lying on the upper portion gets automatically 
washed, even so by the removal of dirt lying at the subtle level, 
the dirt lying at the madhyamd level gets automatically removed.^ 
So, the stage of vaikhari as lying within the pard-samvid is being 
considered. The state of vaikhari in the pard (supreme) state is 
not impossible.^ 

Though the development of speech-organs {sthdna) and arti¬ 
culation {karana) becomes manifest in children in two or three 
years, yet it is an established fact that their proficiency of the 
language increases day after day and month after month. If in 
madhyamd (which is inherent inpardvdk) there were no appearance 
of the lineaments of the letters in accordance with the speech 
organs and articulation that become distinct with the expansion 
of vaikhari^ then there would be no difference in the development 
of language between a child a day old, a month old, or a year old. 
The proficiency {vyutpatti) in the development of language in a 
chUd increases as the impressions of words heard and objects 
seen are associated in his mind. Pardmaria or mental association 
is not possible without word (gross or subtle). Word whether 
expressed externally in a manifest or gross form or implied inter¬ 
nally in an unmanifest subtle form is an aspect of vaikhari. 

In a new-born child even when the vocal organs are not yet 
developed, the subtle form oivaikhari inheres in madhyamd by which 
he is able to associate heard word and seen object by means of an 
inner, subtle, unmanifest implicit proto-language. 

It has also to be admitted that the constituent elements of 
vaikhari are present in his mind in an implicit form for without 
these, he could not have been able to have even an implicit form 
of language and without this he could not have been able to 
associate the seen object and the heard word. 

If it be said that it is madhyamd itself that becomes distinguished 
by the difference resulting from such development, we may ask 
how? Let us discuss this point carefully. 

The child hears the words and sees the objects and thus develops 
his acquisition of language. He mentally lays hold on the words 
heard. The words heard are of the level of vaikhari (articulate 
speech). In regard to these words, he is like one born blind in 
regard to forms. (He hears the sounds but does not know what 



156 


Para- Trisikd- Vivarana 


they refer to). Therefore, vaikhari constituted by speech organs 
and articulation certainly inheres in madhyamd. 

Siimlar is the condition even in the dumb. It has already been 

^{sarvdtma^) goddess pard is all-containing 

"T"" development through 
referents perfecdy manifest words and their 

having the net-work of the diversity and 

so long she is apara. The d of existence within herself, 

which inheres inis knowr^'^^™^*^'^ stage 

paJyanti (is known asparapard) ^^d also the growth of 

goddess. ’ o^vn self, pard is the divine 

Sodhaka, Sodhana and Sodhya 

Thus in the state of purifieH . 

position. The purifier Uodhnk there is a threefold 

expansion is universal. Itfiasal Universal Divine whose 

occurs in this very w'ay (i,e_ • been said that the expansion 

0 be means of purification ff In the matter 

Being the action is that of the 

S “0 repCr^^^P^'OUmitation through 

Cl «* » the state of the glory of His 

?uriLd (f.- 

Pient in the paSyanti of dij empirical being 

expanded by the pardf '^hich 

the form of batU goddess , .u * ^ of limited beings 

ma/iaM-h'of Sad Jiva also 

that is nondifferent fr sinfiif developed by the 

form of the triad (.sun^^ ’^'^^^rable venerable para 

thirty-seven categories ? 

As has been said by' rev^*' ^ settlerfr'^ transcends the 
Siva who has entered • '^^red Som - 

obeisance by Himself ^s th ^J^^da in Sivadrsti: “May 

who is extended as th ^ ^irnt ^j^r:t (as iodhaka) make 

own Saktiin order tor '^^‘^^rse k Mhana), to Siva 

(^•U- I, 1) all obstof pard who is Hi^ 

which are but Himself-’ 



Abhinavagupta 


157 


The entire group of activities (whether hdhaka, hdhana or 
^odhya) indicates this form of Siva in Siva-Drsti. 

In the matter of purification, the succeeding state has to be 
dissolved in the preceding.® 

“Leave both [§odhya ) dharma and adharrna, both truth and false¬ 
hood (i.e. dissolve them in the true Self). Having left both truth 
and falsehood (i.e. the sodliva), leave also that by which you leave 
everything (i.e. give up also the mantra in the form oisodhana by 
'vhlch you give up the sodhya). 

This is the eminence of'Trika Sastra, this is the glory that even 
the purifier,® and the means of purification has to be purified. 
^1 the three (i.e. sodhaka^ ^odhana, and ^odhya, in other words, 
P^yanti, madhyama and vaikhari) exist simultaneously in para (the 

supreme vdk). 

Man speaks something through vaikhari^ ideates through ina- 
^hyajndy experiences some indeterminate state through pa^yanti 
^ud experiences inwardly some truth through para. 

It is Lord Bhairava only who abides completely lull in all the 
three states {tdvati). By closely investigating the traditional 
teaching of the primordial experience, it will be established that 
^t is the met-empirical consciousness of oneself. This is a fact 
that cannot be controverted. 

This is not simultaneous in a temporal sense. Owing to its 
eing subtle, it is not marked. So there is only a presumption of 
^Uultaneity. Just as the piercing of a hundred flowers and buds 
^^gether appears to be simultaneous, so is that. If it be said that 
^^uiultaneous means occuring at the same time, what does it 
Really mean? According to the principle enunciated by me earlier, 

^ that time is only a thought-construct, what is time in the 
^utroverted consciousness? The essence of time consists in the 
^Perience of successive appearance and disappearance of objects. 

essence consists in the non-presence of the awareness of intro- 
^^J^ed consciousness which is time-less. 

^ he objection that though time is experienced in juxtaposition 
^^h successive objects (as prdna-apdna, change of season etc.), it 
th^ the non-temporal consciousness, is not valid, for 

^ successive object is in itself known through the underlying 
j^^sciousness which is not successive. Otherwise how could time 
be known as a distinct object? The rise of the fallacy of 


158 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


mutual dependence is due to the separation of a thing from the 
light of consciousness which is found in one’s own self. Every 
thing that can be uttered has to fall back upon indeterminate 
consciousness {nirvikalpa jfidna). The same fallacy of mutual de¬ 
pendence lies in saying that the piercing of many flowers and 
twigs together means piercing the many. A whole atom does not 
come about by the addition of the last one with the others, for 
this phenomenon is not a karma (operation 

A congruous connexion cannot be established in the absence of 
indeterminate knowledge {jndndbhdvena). Investigation of con¬ 
gruous connexion is not possible if there is a break in memory 
{smrtibhede), and memory depends on indeterminate knowledge 
{jfidna). So investigation of congruous connexion cannot be 
carried out without indeterminate knowledge. I have examined 
tlus problem in detail in my commentary on ‘Padarthapravesa- 
nir^aya So what is the use of this fruitless tangle of words 
which only ends in creating an obstacle in the teaching of the 
subject under discussion? 

Thus the goddess para abides as purifier; pardpard also acts as 
purifier where abide the powers ^aghord^'^^ etc. with whose aid, the 
spiritual practitioners Vijnanakalas have become Mantramahesa 
etc. Through the grace of Brahmi and other goddesses, the minor 
spiritual practitioners have become Brahma, Visnu and others, 
ndeed, it is the Lord, venerable Bhairava who being, through 
t e multitude of His powers, perfect and whole in Himself, infuses 
y is autonomy. His own power into Brahma and others and 
t us makes them autonomous (in their own spheres). What else 
can there be other than this? 

Thus this is another excellence of Trika, viz., that even the 
purifier has to be purified.i^ It has been rightly said, ‘‘Trika is 
mgher even than Kula”. So, owing to the triadic^ature of puri¬ 
fier, agency of purification and the one to be purified Trika is 
invariable. 

As has been said by myself in one of my hymns: “When there 
are three aspects of the group of three {trikay there is no regressus 
ad infimtum^ in this, for every thing of this teaching is of a piece 
with the highest consciousness of the Lord. “Leave that §odhana 
also through which you do away with the sodhya (the one to be 
purified)”-one should consider it in this way. Finally, the 



Abhinavagupta 


159 


purifier has also to be purified, inasmuch as the idea of difference 
that arises in him is also a bondage. Purification is also in its 
highest sense that fire which is non-different firom the conscious¬ 
ness of Bhairava which is proficient in burning away all impurities. 
When every thing viz., that which is to be purified {iodhya)^ the 
means of purification {^odhana)^ and the purifier {iodhaka) enters 
into Bhairava, then it is perfection itself. As will be said, “Thus 
who truly knows etc.” (Verse 25 of this book). 

Notes 

1. In the para or supreme state, she is the repository of varna 
or letters, in the pardpara or supreme-cum-non-supreme state (i.e. 
suksma state) she is the repository of mantra or words; in the apara 
state [sthula state) she is the repository of pada or sentences. 
Mdlini is symbolic of pardpara state, but even in pardpara state, 
she appears as para^ pardpara {sukpna)y and apara {sthula). 

2. The sense is that the gross form is iodhya (to be purified), 
and the subtle form is the iodhaka or purifier; the subtle form is 
iodhya (to be purified) and para (Supreme) form is its iodhaka 
(purifier). This chain goes on until anuttara or the Highest. 

3. In the womb of pardiaktili^s pardvdky in pardvdklic^ pasyantiy 
in paiyanti lies madhyamd and in madhyamd lies vaikhari. Consequ¬ 
ently vaikhari is inherent in pardsamvit. 

4. The triad refers to Siva-Sakti-nam, varna-^mantra^paday para^ 
pardpara-aparay iodhaka-iodhana-^odhya, 

5. In this context, pardpara goddess signifies the original bimba 
podyanti (or patu.iakti) and paiu-iakti signifies the pratibimba or re¬ 
flected paiyanti’-vdk. The first is without ksobhay the second is with 
ksobha. 

6. The triad consists of the sun, fire and moon. The sun or 
suiya symbolizes pramdna or knowledge, the fire or agni symbolizes 
pramdtd or the experient or subject; the moon or soma symbolizes 
prameya or object. Again surya or the sun is the symbol jfidna 
or knowledge; agtii or fire is the symbol of icchd or will, and soma 
or the moon is the symbol of kriyd or activity. Bhairava is the 
unified form of all these triads. 

7. Anuttara has three eyes, agni (fire), soma (moon), and surya 
(sun). These three have 10+16-1-12, i.e. 38 kalds or phases. 
37 kalds being vedya or objects are not svabhdva or essential nature 


160 Para- TrUikd’^ Vivarana 

Anuttara. The 38th kola is the Wi[i3,\r3.v2i-svabhdva or the essential 
nature of anuttara. 

8. Sodhya or that which has to be purified has to be dissolved 
in iodhana or the means of purification and iodhana has to be dis¬ 
solved in sodhaka or the purifier. 

9. This means that finally both sodhya and sodhana have to be 
given up. Be established in your real Self, and then nothing else 
would be required. 

10. What Abhinavagupta is trying to express means that what 

IS a ‘whole’, an integral fact is above time. It is not constituted by 
the sum of the parts what becomes a ‘whole’ by the addition of 
parts, it is the result of karma or operation which is temporal, 
but a real whole or paripurna is not the result of karma or operation! 
It is an expression of kriya Sakti which is beyond time. 

11. This book is untraced. 

_ 12. ‘Aghora’ are those Saktis who help the spiritual practi¬ 
tioners in the realization of Siva-nature. 

13. Tlus hdhaka or purifier refers to such iodhakas as Mantra- 
mahesvara etc. The idea in the purifier, viz. ‘I am purifier’ is 
also a stain. This has also to be given up. 

Text 

From tat parasamvidekamaya etc. on p. 57, I. 22 up to hrdayam- 

gamikrtam on • 


hus Parapara divinities being identical with the highest con¬ 
sciousness are omnifarious {sarvatmaka) and therefore include 
in nite variety of secular and sacred words and their referents 
as has been said in Malinivijaya III, verses 59-60. 

The very powerful yoginis which are like limbs of parapara 
man ra are eight.2 They include successively five, six, five, four, 
and two, three letters twice.^ They are constituted by the nomi- 
natives of address amounting to seven, eleven, one and one-and- 
nalt letter twice, i.e. twenty-two letters.^ 

Thus this relation of the purifier and the one to be purified is 
constituted by the inclusion of endless pre-concerted signs {sairi- 
keta) pertaining to mantras already composed or to be composed 
in future. This does not amount to regressus ad infinitum {anavas- 


Abhinavagupta 


161 


thd)y nor to irrelevance {ati prasahga) nor to too wide pervasion 
{ativydpti). Nor can it be said that a conventional sign cannot 
indicate spiritual knowledge. This is accepted. This being the 
position, we are now pursuing the topic under discussion. 

The syntactical connexion of the words in the fifth verse indi¬ 
cates that at first there are ‘a’ and other vowels (upto au). At 
their end, through the connexion of kriydiakti {kdlayogena) occur 
what are known as soma (moon) and surya (sun).® By the word 
in the phrase ^tadantaff is to be understood ^akula^ i.e. anuttara 
or Bhairava referred to in a previous verse. Therefore ^akula* 
is that which includes within itself the effectuating power {kaland ), 
for the kulaiakti (the cosmic creative power) inheres in it.® It 
is the vimar^aiakti (the energy of the creative I-consciousness) 
that is the effectuating power {kalandtmikd). Without this vimar§a^ 
iakti even akula which transcends the fourth state, is mere noth¬ 
ing, for it is only inherent in the deep sleep state. The states 
that come immediately after turya (i.e. sumptiy svapna and 
jdgrat) arc also similar to turya (i.e. they are also mere noth¬ 
ing without vimar§a iakti), Vimar^aiakti abides as the supreme, 
divine, unsurpassed (nirati§aya')y autonomous §akti of venerable 
Bheiirava, fall {purna)y emaciated (Arifl), both full and emaciated, 
neither full nor emaciated.’ 

In the vimaria^akti of Bhairava, this is no stain either of the 
appearance of succession or simultaneity. According to the 
precept referred to previously, viz., that time is only a thought 
construct, succession should be deliberated upon {kramo vicdraril- 
yah) in accordance with the fact that the very nature of the mas¬ 
sive creative Self-consciousness {vimariaikaghana) of the supreme 
{pardbhatparikd) gives rise to infinite, future absorption and emana¬ 
tion and that there is an appearance of succession and non¬ 
succession {kramdkramdvabhdsah) in that nature of the Divine 
which is above both succession and simultaneity {kramayaugapadya- 
sahisnu). As has been said: “Lord Bhairava is autonomous, per¬ 
fect, whole and omnipresent. That which does not appear in the 
mirror of His Self does not exist.” Non-succession can have its 
existence only in consciousness in which there is an appearance 
of both succession and non-succession {akramasya tatpurvakeria 
samvidyeva bkdvdt) so succession has to be accepted for the sake of 
exposition. Since succession has its ratio essendi in consciousness 


P<i^&-Triiikd-Vivarana 

only, all this mental grip in the form of speech is only succession 
{sarva evayam vagrupah paramariah kramika eva). That grip which 
is of the inner consciousness is non-successive only. Thus the 
divine supreme Sakti {parabhattdrikd) is always of this kind, i.e 
multifarious and variegated (vicilrd). Therefore it is in accor¬ 
dance with succession i.e. in order to indicate succession in non- 
succession, the grammarians have formed ‘at" by placing ‘t’ after 

the autonomy {svdtantryasakti) of the Lord in the form of 
1 1 in which the manifestation of existents has not yet started 
\anumilita-bhava-vikdsd) and the essence of which consists in an 
inner massive I-consciousness is designated ‘a’. That svdtantrya- 
saktx (power ofautonomy) abiding in the Transcendent (anultL\ 
IS designated Will® m which that which is to be willed has not yet 
ecome proimnent. This will is only a state of consciousness of 
the transcendental being {anuttara-sattd). The highest Lord is 
always conscious of His own nature. He is akulLkfi xr I 
m being aware of His form. He makes use of kula^akti ' t 

T.a."sr 

denotes dnandaSakti. Perfect icchd or Will is ‘V. Icchd itstlf ^ ^ 
to perceive(lit. to seize) the future jfidna or knotlelfr T 
Its autonomy becomes ‘P which denotes Hand ^ through 

f/ U the or appearance oOM iTd .T.hTr''""''';- 
al lobjectrve exiaenra desired ,o be known. *' 

When mmsa or the arising of knowledge tmmisaun\ i 
conscousness. the desire for further objeeUvity 
the transcendental consciousness becomes dimWshod'> 'T’- ’ 
r“f to contraction [satkoca,a!ena^ .l- n" d 

to all forms lying within or tending to assume sXeo ‘I 

muteude of existents which lie within as 

which the aspect of difference is almost indistinct and t, b’ ” 

tending to appear objectiycly T' 

ecause of its re tention within itself of all objectiyity (ZTsS 
•According to Panini’s Sutra Haparastatakalasya’. 



Abhinavagupta 


163 


vagarbhtkdrena) y is like the udder of the wish-fulfilling celestial cow, 
viz.thepardlakti {ananga-dhainavirupd-paradevatayah-udhorupa)^ and 
upholding the multitude of entire objectivity, becomes manifest 
{sphuta)^ wide-spreadingjwawa iakti^ i.e. ^u\ 

These viz., t, z, and zz, u are the two powers (viz., icchdiakti and 
jndnaiakti) of Lord Bhairava. The first (viz. z, z) being the 
completely full nature of Bhairava is perfect and being non- 
different from the Somasakti abides as soma in accordance with 
the etymological interpretation ‘one who abides with Umdy {umd 
saha) i.e. transcendental icchd or Will is soma. Thus svdtantrya 
iakti (the power of autonomy) in the form of icchd (will) resting 
in its own dnanda (bliss) is designated mahdsrspi (transcendental 
emanation).^® As will be said (in verse 29 in this book): “The 
heroic sddhaka {yirah) should thereafter worship srsfi (emana¬ 
tion).” The second one (viz., w, u or unmesa^ unatdmayi jndnaiakti) 
becomes prominent by being engaged in the separation {recana) 
i.e. external expansion of the multitude of objects which abide 
identically with the icchaJakti of Bhairava and by being engaged 
in the anupraveia i.e. in withdrawing them and effecting their 
entrance in andirita Siva. 

By the separation of the multitude of objects, she becomes 
emaciated, as she is engaged in the manifestation and expansion 
of objects. Thus she is like the sun.^^ Being identical with the 
essential nature of Bhairava, by the desire to withdraw the crea¬ 
tive consciousness into andirita Siva {kulasamvitsariijihisdtmikd)^ 
she is known as jndnaiakti who has the tremendous power of with¬ 
drawal. Again, reviewing her former expanding form, she, within 
herself, looks for the previous state of her own transcendental 
consciousness, symbolized by moon (soma) with the disposition 
of the retention of the successive form of the sun and the moon.^® 
In an inverse state she looks for the aspect of the moon, the sym¬ 
bol of manifestation {srsti) and the sun, the symbol of withdrawal 
{sarrihdra). 

In this changing state, now wishing samhdra and now wislung 
srs\i^jhdna and icchd sometimes tending towards expansion and 
sometimes not, one should not attribute the fallacy of non-finahty 
{na ca atrdnavasthd iti vdcyam), for the expansion (prasara) and 
non-expansion (aprasara) go on changing their position. Some¬ 
times there may be expansion {prasara) oiicchd (will), and non- 


164 


Pard-TriHkd- Vivarana 


expansion {aprasara) of jndna^ and sometimes there may be 
expansion {prasara) o^jndna (knowledge) and non-expansion of 
icchd. Desist from wandering in the error of external appearance. 
Set out on the path of subtle reflection. 

When there is the knowledge of the round shape^ colour etc. of 
ajar, at that very time, the self-shining indeterminate knowledge 
{svayampratham jfidnam) i.c. nirvikalpaka knowledge mingled with 
the knowledge of the object, viz., the jar or savikalpaka jfidna 
(determinate knowledge) also displays itself. In the knowledge 
of the jar, that is also, communicated {samvedya) which displays 
the initial, subtle appearance of the variegated form of the jar 
{tadrupakarburibhdve ghatddi) the origin of the appearance is the 
same {ekabhavodgamasya prathamdnatvdt) viz., the nirvikalpa oi 
indeterminate consciousness, there being the complete absence 
of any other agency {anyatah kutascit abhdvasya). 

It is the autonomy of this indeterminate consciousness only 
which desirous of projecting objects is known as Hand or soverei¬ 
gnty. This is known by the testimony of one’s own experience. 

Eternal Pervasion of Anutlara and Ananda in Icchd and Jfidna 

That indeterminate consciousness {nirvikalpa) which is not 
yet limited by the cluster of objects, which is massive conscious¬ 
ness, perfect and whole, whose very being is autonomy is per- 
ectly autonomous only because of its having within itself a mass 
o beatitude. Therefore the presence of dnanda (beatitude) in it 
cannot be gainsaid. Anutlara {a), the unsurpassable, the possessor 
o bakti or creative energy, who is beyond all appellation or des¬ 
cription, whose essence is supreme amazement of beatitude, who 
IS venerable Bhairava, of course, shines everywhere (i.e. both as 
iva from ‘a’ to and as jagat (world from ka to ksa) as the 
autonomous active agent. 

If one reflects on the essential ol anutlara {a) dnanda 

{a), {ak^ubdha or calm) icchd{i), {ksubdha or perturbed icchd) i.e. 
liana {i), {aksubdha or czXm jfidna), unmesa {u) {ksubdha or pertur¬ 
bed jwana), unatd{u) —one will find that the above six phonemes 
rest in the indivisible plane of consciousness i.e. anuttara or 
phase as-their base and that these divinities, the (six) energies of 
consciousness (though appearing separately) are not separate 


Abhinavagupta * ^ ^ 

from their basic essential nature {ananyd cva sva-samvidah)^ for 
being perfect, there is no difference in their nature.^^ 

These ^aktis appear to be different because of the objects of 
experience with which they are associated {samvedyopade^ca). 
This difference lasts only so long as the objects of experience are 
due to the physical limitation (tasya-upadhih dehasarrwedya mdtra’- 
tayaiva bhdvdt). Therefore in Tantrasara, it has been said that 
reality has to be imderstood through the example of the shadow 
of the best part of the body i.e. the head. “Just as (when) one 
tries to jump over the shadow of one’s head with one’s foot, the 
head will never be at the place of one’s foot, so (also) is it with 
baindavi kald.^'^^ Thus this group of six ^aktis (from ‘fl’ to ‘m’) 
which has been determined covers the powers upto jndna. 

Now we are going to deliberate on kriydiakti^ the power of 
activity that has begun to move forward. Icchd (will) ^xidjndna 
themselves by heterogenous intermixture^®, by admitting the 
succession of the preceding and following which are full of mar¬ 
vellous strangeness are termed kriyd. Iinpetuous eagerness is the 
essence of kriyd. Whatever iiiterrnixture occurs owing to the 
^pansion of kriydiakti with something else, is due to the fact that 
anuttara (the Absolute) enters suddenly in a sphere of reality 
which is beyond mental grasp {andmarianiya)y and void (i.e. the 
state of andhita Siva) just as a frog by a simple leap reaches ano¬ 
ther place from one place. The consciousness that is anuttara {a) 
and ananda (a) <ioes not expand in the first four spheres (i.e. f, 
U {) prasarati)y of kriydiaktiy for that is an unnamable 
[andkhyd) state, not being the object of name and form {ndma^ 
rupa). 

Anuttara and ananda being the final support of everything 
[paryantahhittirupatvdt) and after having been the foundation of the 
entire activity in every kind of knowledge cease (from expansion), 
ak^ubdha icchd ends in ksubdha Uand. So far as its relation to imr 
petuous eagerness is concerned, it is capable of expanding both 
in its own field and also in anuttara and dnanda because of its capa¬ 
city for succession. 

Then that kriyd§akti full of impetuous eagerness, penetrating 
into its own form (denoted by r, f, /,7) which is void (i.e. devoid 
of all manifestation), immerges at first into a luminous form which 
is tejas or fire (denoted by the experience of r). Thus arise r and 





166 


Para-Tri^ikd-Vivarana 


f. How can it be denied that in these letters, the energy of ic- 
chdSakti(i) and that of Uandiakti (£) are associated with the 
sound of ‘R' whose essential nature is luminosity.!^ This is what 
the glorious Puspadanta says: “The tejas and mobility found in 
T, f are established with the general sound of‘r’.” 

When icchd-Uand desires to enter the void, i.e. the state of 
andJnta Siva who is free of any manifestation, they have first to 
pass through the stages of luminosity {bhdsvararupa) i.e. the stages 
.r and f united with the r sound. After this, icchd-Uand following 
the sound 7 ’ assumes the form of / and / which indicates immo- 
1 ty, the essential nature of the earth {pdrthivarupa-satattva) 
inally. It is the energy of Uand, which passing over all the states of 
objectivity, jumping over the longer state {dirghataram plutvd), 
immobile state of vacuity i.e. /, attains to the 
p olated state {plutatvameti) i.e. / in accordance with the principle 
anskrit grammar that phoneme ‘/’ does not have the lone- 
form of ,he phonemes V ere., the prolated srateTs o„"y 

alreX■•°o“ ° h*'l)r"® ™''> *0 rule stated 

penetLioi ^ account of its 

of a vLel Noth “ total absence of germ i.e. the state 

owel. Nothing can exist which is neither u 

wluch symbolize Siva and Sakti, for the r T 

«;‘ng has not been mentioned iither in PQ'^0°^ 

r-joya) or any other Sastra, Even in ^oZZ j " 

r “ tepose of this kind. That is why If 

and the s"phe”e*'i'"''i/’^°”° '’'"'•'■o’' 'he aspect of unanda 

lapse from Zr T "> and never 

(Lndul Dlufr "-o ■tave V {anutUra) or d 

letter T becomeZ. ■'"= 

In the inverse state (i.e., if '«• and ‘o’ come after ‘V and ‘i’l 

Tel eV If r “‘to a rfferem 

state ‘ P'O'ttatcs «W» i.e. 'o’, there will be a long 

state (,/,&/« a) of the vowel ■«■. If.’ or -f penetrates i.e 

, heie Will be a short state {sSksmatd) of‘e’.u Similarly glo- 
nous Patanjali says: ^ 


Abkinavagupta 


167 


“Among those who recite the Vedas (chandogandm) the follo¬ 
wers of the sub-branch satyamugri of the branch Ranayaniya enun¬ 
ciate also as half i.e. short e and short t?” [Here satya is symbolic 
of‘short’ and ugri is symbolic of long]. 

Among the common folk also, this practice is quite manifest. 
In the Saiva^astras also {pdrame^varem api) the short aspect of V 
and ‘o’ in comparison to ‘ai’ and which is noticed in the 
application of angavaktra i.e. in connexion with limbs or mouth, 
should be considered in this light viz., ‘o’ becomes ^aya" in place 
of long ai and ‘o’ becomes ^ava* in place of long au. Thus the posi¬ 
tion with regard to the vowels ‘o’ and ‘o’ is settled. 

Now when ‘o’ combines with ‘a’ and ‘5’ {tathd iabalibhUtarii)^ it 
becomes ‘oi’. Similarly in the case of unmesa i.e., when it 
coalesces with ‘o’ or ‘5’ we have ‘o’. So also when w coalesces with 
‘o’ or ‘5’ we have ‘o’. When ‘o’ combines with a or ‘o’ we have 
‘fltt’ [o is the fifth stage of kriydJaktiy ai is the sixth, o is the seventh, 
and au is the eighth and final stage of kriydiakti^. 

ThoughMomojo i.e., jnoooioAri expanding can penetrate into the 
void, yet it can do so only when it enters at first icchd and Hand 
{asya Hanecchdtmakobhayarupa praveia eva ^Unyatd) . It is only thus 
that there can be an entry in the void. In the case of icchd and 
i/ono, there is no question of change of their essential nature. 
So, their position remains as before. Thus icchd and jnooo (i.e* 
/, i, tt, fi) by entering the essential nature of anuttara (i.e. o) be¬ 
come developed, i.e. reach au which is symbolic of full develop¬ 
ment otkriydiakti. After this, they abandon the variation of those 
iaktiSy and mounting to the state of non-difference, get immersed 
in the remaining form of a bindu i.e. a dot which represents 
awareness {yedand) of the very nature of the Reality that is pure 
consciousness {cinmayapurusatattvasatattva) ^ and get immersed m 
the anuttara state. So they get dissolved in the state of anuttara. 
The vibration of kriydiakti ends in au. The vibration of icchd 
zxidjhana comes to a stop here, for icchd dmdjhdna are included in 
kriyHaktiJ^^ In the Trika l^astra, the nature of au is determin¬ 
ed as a trident^^ in the enunciation of topics, in the following 
verse: 

“The venerable pard vdk pervades the three spheres (<z 9 (/a) 
viz. pYthivi, prakrti and mdyd with the letter with the trident 



^ Po.ra- TrUikd- Vivarana 

i..e., ‘au\ she pervades the fourth (i.e. the Sakti anda). With ’’aK 
she pervades that which transcends all.”23* 

The dot {hindu) represents the remainder, viz., pure awareness 
only. [The tw'ofold nature of expansion and the beginning of 
iaktaprasara or iakta expansion]. When the highest Lord emana¬ 
tes within Himself the entire cosmos as only pure awareness in 
order to express unity {ekagamanaya) at first as predominantly 
the possessor of Sakti, i.e., as Siva {saktimat-rupapradhanataya), and 
next as predominantly Sakti {sakta-visargapradhanataya) with the 
creative means of that (tannirmanena i.e. icchd, jnana and kriya). 
1 he visarga ah is symbolic*® of sdkta visarga. 

In respect of fully dei'eloped kriyasakti of such an extent {etavati) 

^pulsation oi icchd, the 
initial, the imddle, and kriyd, the final appearing first as 

fLatiorr°-”"T'^'''i comprehension of mani- 

thTZyr. K manifestation (krivd) 

arecEv “*<> all ihese. These 

tation a^dTT u nsedi- 

Sts“as as Svacchanda and other practical 

and f Pr^^ara^, connoting 

sevcnThX;r"TL *' k“” aaid In the 

w “'‘‘““S on Ae supreme Self 

V i.e X (ato*). fuUfledged 

PamT 'Aom all the three 

V iz. iccna^ jnana and knya) are fused • i_ 

nature of Siva)" Again, “It U Hi, SaUtVlT T 

form of the cosmos, just as a mas, of clay aS^uXttT" r 

®-“».fives,:rxrit°dSa:s 

Two points in this verse are noteworthy: 

1. The earlier aspect oikriyd with icchd refers to transrf:*nr^ 

mayata): the latter aspect refers to immanence of W (Sit {vUvottlnja- 

2. + fiff + : make the mantra .W, of which -ra’ rL cITsT^'h 1 

of prthivi, prakrli .ndmdya^.^. the 31 d 

saddHva and the represents Siva and Sakti 

entire divine manifestation. represents tl.e 



Abhinavagupta 


169 


that it is Siva only who having assumed plentitude {bharitatd) of 
wondrous delight the effect of pulsating energy which is only an 
expresdon of the expansion of autonomy that is infinite ^d 
wonderful, has acquired the aspect of Bhairava. 

In Siva-Dfsti, this is the position which has been described in 
the first chapter which lays down the tradition of Trika: “When 
anuttara abides only in the experience of its consciousness and bliss 
{ciddnanda)y at that time its irckd-^akti (as known of the fonh of 
abhyupagama)y jndnaiakti (of the form of prakdia or light) also 
abide in the same consciousness and bliss {ciddnanda). Thus Siva 
abides with perfect fusion of the three subtle Saktis (viz. icchdy 
jndna and kriyd) in Himself. That supreme Reality is then the 
highest cit (consciousness) and dnanda (beatitude) without any 
differentiation {nirvibhdgah) (SDI, 3-4) 

Referring to the knowledge of an object, such as ajar, the same 
text says: 

“Even at the time of the knowledge of an object, such as a 
jar etc. (these five aspects viz. icchdy jndnay kriydy dnanda and cit 
are present ); ‘one knows the jar’—this indicates kriydiaktiy ‘knows’ 
this fact indicates jndna-^akti and if one does not have icchdy 
knowledge would not be possible (lit., there would be destruction 
of knowledge). When a thing has been known (i.e. sStcr pramiti) 
the absence of inclination towards that thing {aunmukhydbhdva) 
indicates his abstention {nivrtti) from that thing, but this is 
not possible without the experience of dnanda {nirvTtti)i that is 
why one does not advance towards that which one dislikes; 
and knowledge is not possible without (SD I, 24-25). 

Similarly: 

“Because one desires, therefore one proceeds to know or do. 
Activity takes place only with desire. Of this (i.e., of activity 
with desire), two aspects have to be assumed, viz. the earlier and 
the later (SD I, 19). The earlier consists of the acquisition of 
dnanda (beatitude) accruing from accomplishing a deed; the 
later consists of its inclination towards manifestation which is its 
expansion. Siva does not at all become gross by this inclination 
towards manifestation” (SD I, 17). 

This treasure of Agama has been accepted on account of its 
reasonableness as one’s very life. 


170 


Pard- Trisikd-^ Vivarana 


Notes 


1. The pardpara mantra consists of 19 padas. They are the 
following; 

1. Orri 2. agkore 3. hrih 4. paramaghore 5. hum 6 . ghorarupe 7 . hah 

8 . ghoramukhi 9. bhime 10. bhisane 11 . vama 12. piba 13. he 14. m m 

\5. rata l 6 .phaf 17. hum 18. hah 19 .phat 

In this mantra, ru ru ra ra phat hurji hah phat pertain to Siva, so 

we are not concerned with these in this context. The remaining 

or pertain to Sakti with which we are concerned here. 

. The eight like limbs ofparapara mantra are the follow¬ 
ing; 


1. Bral^ 2 . Mahesvari 3. Kaumari 4 . Vaisnavl 
• ndrani 7. Camunda 8 . Yogesvari. 

3. They include 30 letters as shown below: 


5. Varahl 



Divinities 

1 . 

Brahmi 

2 . 

Mahesvari 

3. 

Kaumari 

4. 

Vaisnavi 

5. 

Varahi 

6 . 

Indrani 

7. 

Camunda 

8 . 

Yogesvari 


Mantras pfo. of letters 


Om aghore hrih 5 

Parama ghore burn 6 

Ghora rupe hah 5 

Ghoramukhe 4 

Bhime 2 

Bhisane ^ 

Vama 2 

piba he o 


Total: 30 


folloJng:"°"“"^*'''“ of address amounting to 22 letters are the 

1 . Aghore 3 

2 . Paramaghore 5 

3. Ghorarupe ^ 

4. Ghoramukhi 4 

5. Bhime 2 

6 . Bhisane 3 

7. He ’ ' , 


22 







Abhinavagupta 


171 


5. See the note on Soma and Siva on the verse 5 earlier. 

6 . Akida-kula: Akula is Bhairava, the transcendental energy; 
kula is the Sakti that brings about manifestation. Akula contains 
kula as ‘a’ contains all the other phonemes. 

7. Purr^-kf^a-vimar^a-iakti: the Divine Creativ^e Energy is said 
to be full or puma because it is she who goes on projecting things 
out of herself which indicates that she is perfectly full and rich. 
She is said to be puma from the point of view of srspi or emanation. 

She is said to be krid or emaciated, because she reabsorbs all 
that she has emanated which indicates that she is depleted and 
must take back the manifested objects to make up her loss. She is 
said to be krid from the point of view of satrihdra or withdrawal. 
She is said to be both, tadubhayata^ because she both emanates and 
withdraws. 

She is said to be none of these— tadubhaya^rahita —because in 
herself, she transcends all these conditions. All the adjectives 
which are applied to her only point to the limitations of human 
speech. In reality, she is inexpressible in any human language. 

8 . Icchd is different from icchdiaktu 

9. A is the state of sdmarasya (identity) of akula^ anuttara and 
kulaSakti. This is known as ^bhairavaiaktimadvimariasattd.^ 

10. There is triple srspii (i) that wliich is only transcendental 
emanation at the level of pard vdk or Supreme Verbum is mahd* 
STfti. This is undifferentiated, (ii) When it is reflected in pard- 
pard iakti i.e., at the level of paiyanti and madhyamd it is known as 
pardpard (iii) When it is fully differentiated in apard iakti at 
the level of vaikhariy it is known as apard srsfi¬ 

ll. Suryarupd: She is compared to the Sun, because the sun 

projects his energy outwards. 

12. Soma here represents the viivottirna or the transcendental 
state and surya or the sun represents the viivamaya or the imma¬ 
nent state. In an inverse state, soma or moon is the symbol of 
manifestation and surya or sun is the symbol of withdrawal. 

13. Just as ‘a’ pervades all the phonemes from to ^u\ even 
so these also rest in the anuttara ^a\ So is the base both from the 
point of view of expansion from d to u and contraction from u 
to d. 

14. On the basis of sarvdtmaka-bhdva (each is the epitome of all) > 
the other five are inherent in each. 


172 


Pard^ TrUikd- Vivarana 


15. Baindavi kald\ Baindavi means pertaining to hindu, Bindu 
or vindu which ordinarily means a dot represents the parahpramdtd^ 
the Highest Self. Just as it is impossible for one to catch the 
shadow of one’s head with one’s feet, for the shadow of the head 
always eludes them, even so it is impossible to know the knower by 
the various means of knowing, for these owe their own existence to 
the knower. In this particular context what is meant to be said is 
XhzX icchd iakti cannot be grasped by means of the objects o^iccha 
(desire) with which it is associated, for objects owe their very 
existence to icchd or desire. 

16. Heterogenous intermixture is such as r = rd-/, f=r+f, 

f ^ = ai — a-\-€^ o = a-\-u^ au = There is no 

intermixture from a to m as they are homogenous. Eight vowels 
fromr upto au are the field of kriydsakti. ^ 


17. In that void is experienced a faint sound of V’ which to- 
gether with of iVcAaraAyi becomes V’ and with i oiisanasakii be¬ 
comes f. Thus V’ IS the seed letter {bija svara) o<itejas or fire 

18. i? which is agnihija (the seed letter of fire) is symbolic of 
heat and mobility and / which is prthivibija (the seed letter of 
eartn; is symbohe of solidity and compactness. 

transcendental 

to spreading externally at first being averse 

as the sTat ^ ^ of vacuity known 

said that t phoneme /, it may be 

aid that transcending the long aspect of 1, it rom» +• 

in tbf^ hh,f„ 1 , oomes to cessation 

in ttie pluta or prolated aspect of 1. 

beSusJ!“i?T'’ '“T f “ “<• 'obe eunuch, 

seilt L “““““ “f '’»*> j“st as a eunuch has a 

aC becaL A T'Ky are called eunuch 

also because they are unable to produce any other letter iust as a 

eunuch cannot produce a child. They are called germless only 

«ed uLbkT ““"“i""’ "'Py burn, 

^ed unable to proceed into further expansion. Being vowels, 

they are not totally germless. ” 


21 . 


In the inverse state i.e. if ^a' and ‘a> come after 


and H' 


^ 1 n , alter i aiiu c , 

and not before there will be >’ instead of according to 
Eanini s rule of sandhi—^^iko yanaci^^ 

22. Though according to the grammar of classical Sanskrit, 


Abhinavagupta 


173 


both .Bf ai and o are long, yet in the aspect of mantra in iSaiva- 
ikstXBi and the Vedas ancL ‘o’ are short also. So a+t or i = e 
(short) and d = i or i = o (long). In the Trika, the short vowel 
symbolizes Siva and the long one symbolizes the union of Siva- 
Sakti. 

23. Icckd and Uand do not have any other element in them. 
Unmesa or jfidna has the elements of both icchd oxid jndna in it. 

24. An is called triiula or iulabija i.e. trident because all the 
iaktis^ icchdyjfidnay and kriyd are present in it in the clearest form. 

25. The internal expansion of manifestation within anuttara 
itself comes to a stop at au^ for this letter indicates the termination 
of kriydiakti within anuttara itself. After this, the expansion of 
manifestation is withdrawn into the unity of anuttara. The dot 
{hindu) in ‘am’ is symbolic of the dissolution of the inner mani¬ 
festation in anuttara. 

This inner manifestation is the bimba or origin of its pratibimba 
or reflection in the external manifestation in the world. The 
inward manifestation is accomplished inwardly in anuttara itself 
and is known as svarupa-srspi or the manifestation within the 
inward nature itself. 

The vowels from ‘a’ to ‘aa’ represent the inner manifestation 
within anuttara^ and the vowel am represents the dissolution {sani- 
kdra) of the inner manifestation within anuttara itself and identi- 
ficatibn with ^dnmaya^purusa-tattvcC i.e., with Sdmbhava-tattva. 

The developed form of icchd-iakti is jfidna-iakti^ and the deve¬ 
loped form ofjndna-^akti is kriyd-iakti. So kriyd-iakti includes both 
icchd and jndna. 

Abhinavagupta says in Tantraloka III, Verse 111: 

uditayam kriyasaktau somasuryagni dhamani / 
avibhagah prakaso yah sa binduh paramo hi nah // 

“When kriydiakti is accomplished in the phases represented by 
soma or icchd-iakti^ surya or jhdnaiakti and agni or kriydiakti i.e. m 
the entire svarupa-srsti or inner manifestation of anuttara^ the 
experience at the bottom of all this that flashes forth is the dot 
known as Siva-im^/w (or vindu) i.e. that which is undivided light, 
that which, in spite of all differentiation, does not change, remains 
unaffected and does not deviate from its inherent oneness is 
vindu (the dot expressed by <7^ = .)” 



' Pard^TriHkd-Vivarana 

26. The two dots of visarga (:) indicate the truth that though 
from the point of view of Sakti symbolized by the lower dot, there 
is an expansion of an outer world, yet from the point of view of 
Siva or iaktimat symbolized by the upper dot, the entire universe 
rests in the I-consciousness of Siva. 

27. In manifesting the world, there is no vikdra or change in 
Siva. All manifestation is the outcome of his Sakti, but he is not 
changed in the gross physical world. Trika does not believe in 
Pannamavada. Its doctrine is that of svatantryavada. Siva brings 
about the manifestation of the world by means of his svdtantrya 
or absolute autonomy by which he effects all changes without 

undergoing any change in himself. This is represented by the dot 
in arri {.). ^ 


Text 


From 
on p. 69 


sae^saparameivaro visrjation p. 63, 1 .6 upto prdgeva uktametat 

[The nature of Sakti-wrarga and activity ] 
Translation 

The Lord (always coupled with His emanatory Enerevi ema¬ 
nate the umvetse. Thau energy of emanation (LaSiti) 

tends from the earth to ‘sakti’ (from the point ^ e t\, \ 
or froTva ‘i. > * ‘L > /c au • point of view of tattva) 

or from ka to ksa (from the point of view of letter) This is 

declaredas the ‘sixteenth kald’’'- (also as amd knli\ ■ *u r ii 
vprsta. «T., tu • a. • in the following 

verse, in the ctnmaya purtisa, i.e. Siva who ;<t caf i. /- au 
Ifith Unia ; 1 . 77 /. IS oi 16 kalas, the 

lotn kata IS known as amrtakala (the immortal « u i 
knln^\ ” Tu- • au a j • immortal or ‘changeless 

Kata). This is the standpoint neither of Sam If V.,, cw j- 

nta, but only of Saiva sLtra. The JlSh’lfr 7 
Lord is the seed of the highest beatitude ' 

coIn^,'“’ “t > “■ ““I I') having acquired 

Musonant do not devtate front thetr essential nature. Ail these, 
by thM transmuston m consonants (j„i ^pa) which are how- 
ever thetr own essenhal nature, are known as having acquired 
the position oi visarga i.e. expansion. As has been said, “O great 
pddess, that, where the vowels finaUy reach their state of repose 
I.e., the consonants, is said to be the face of the guru {guru- 


Abhinavagupta 


175 


vaktra) or visarga pada^ and the collective whole of the 
{lakti^cakra),^^^ 

The condensation of ‘a’ itself makes the class ‘A:a% all of them 
being guttural; the condensation of ‘i* makes the class, all of 
them being palatal. The condensation of ‘m’ gives rise to ‘pa* 
class, all of them being labial. The condensation off brings about 
the ‘/fl* class, all of them being cerebral. The condensation of T 
bring about the ‘to* class, all of them being dental, ^a* and ‘fa* 
go along with Va* class; ‘ra* and ‘^a* go along with ‘/a* class being 
cerebral. ‘La* and ‘ja* go along with ‘/a* class, being dental* 
‘Fa* issues from ‘to* and ‘pa* class i.e., it is labio-dental. Even in 
Vijfl^kala who has either svdtarUfya or iaktiy but lacks bodha or 
awareness, or has merely bodha (cinmUtro^api) but not svdtanhya^ 
there is the kriyaiakti (i.e., even his cinmdtratd or bodha is a subtle 
form oi kriydiakti). That compactness {ghanatd) accruing at vis* 
arga-paday according to the mode as described earlier {uktanityd) 
is produced by the group of six iaktisy viz., a, 5, s, f, a, u; or anut* 
taray dnandoy icchdy Handy unme^ay and Unatd. Thus the five classes 
of city dnanddy icchdy jHdnay and kriyd multiplied by six iaktis (onttf- 
tara etc.) referred to above become thirty. With the addition of 
the six referred to above,the total becomes thirty-six tattvas. 

Thus Siva-J£;a i.e. svara (vowel) becoming condensed through 
its autonomy and abiding in the idkta-rUpa in a iakti form as 
kusuma (blood) is called i.e. a consonant.^ (By the combi¬ 
nation of Siva-i(/a and Sdkta'-yoniy there is universal manifestation). 

That red sperm of iSakti or female principle according to the 
principle referred to before, consisting of three angles viz., grdfya 
(object), graharm (knowledge), grdhaka (subject) when mingled 
with the semen of Siva or male principle becomes the place of 
procreation (visargapadd) or external expansion. It is only by 
the meeting of both Siva and Sakti that there is the activity of 
pu§pa or the female creative red sperm, i.e. in the female aspect, 
it is known as yoni or female organ of generation because of its 
fitness for mating by the Siva aspect or male. Therefore, that red 
sperm {kusumam eva) itself being three-angled represents the yoni 
or female organ of generation. At this stage, the triad of grd/y^a 
or prameya (object), grahana or pramdsia (knowledge), grdhaka or 
pramdtd (subject) symbolizes clearly the three forms of soma 
(moon), sUtya (sun), agni (fire), mfiySthiHySatrihdrayiddy pihgaldy 



176 


Pard-TrUikd’- Vivarana 


susumnd^ dharma^ adharma^ and mixed form of the two i.e. dharma- 
dharma. The triadic Sakti of the Supreme is known as Bhairavl. 
The meeting point or union of Siva and Sakti now appears in the 
form of a hexagonal {satkona) mudra and being the spot and basis 
of the generation of manifestation is designated as yoni or the 
female organ of generation. (While both Siva and Sakti are 
separately triadic, their union is hexagonal).^ 

In the chapter on khandacakravicdra in Kubjikamata, it is with 
reference to this matter that it has been declared: “There is 
mahdmdyd above mdyd who is the very embodiment of bliss because 
of her being of a triangular aspect.” Therefore, the union of Siva 
and Sakti which h represented by semen (bija) and ovum {kusu- 
ma) being fused into one compactness should be worshipped by 
oneself m the form of his Self. This is what has been advised in 
Trikatantrasara: 

“The spiritual aspirant who experiences his identity with the 
incipient unity of Siva-Sakti found in iccha-sakti and with their 
compact unity found in jnana-Sakti should worship the highest 
triad of the umon of the triangular aspect of Siva and the triangu¬ 
lar aspect of Sakti.” ® 

'i'f of 'l'= phonemes becomes 

^tmct only m the or gross aspect, yet it abides primarily 

“ If-ramk) which is all inclusive [sarvmarvd. 

as'throi' 'ven the organs of speech (rttaa) such 

Xe Thl T" ”7 '■’^’“’>‘'1 ate all-inclu. 

mutjfand P".'"' “ Even inwardly one 

mutters and envisions. This is a matter of distinret • 

Their difference is due to the various 

audition IS the very hfe of the letters. Moreover, even a child 
when he is being taught the use of words, learns the names of 

tMnrin tf"'' within. Even while he 

thinks m the opposite way or in an uncertain way so lonv as he 

^es his mind, he does know something. All understanding is 
due to use of words So letters which are produced by contrac¬ 
tion of ihe throat {samvara), expansion of the throat (vivdra), 
which are unaspiratfed {alpaprdna) and which are aspirated 
{mahaprana) with the aid of breath and sound are present ac 
cording to their appropriate nature, inwardly (in madhyamd 


Abhinavagupta 


177 


pafyantiy) as they are in vaikhari). Otherwise (i.e., if it were not 
so) then on account of there being no difference in the letters 
produced by the same organ of articulation, the powers of the 
sens^ uttering the letters separately would disappear even in 
vaikhari. Besides diversity of ideas like ‘I hear* (in vaikhari) and 
‘I heard* (in madhyama and paly anti) ; ‘I see* (in vaikhari) and ‘I 
saw* (in madhyama and pafyanti) ; ‘I ideate* (in vaikhari) and I 
ideated* (in madhyama and paiyanti) would other\vise be impos¬ 
sible (i.e., if these diversities were not present in the inner states). 

So by this repeatedly thought-out reasoning, entering more and 
more in the interior, cherish that consciousness which is a mass of 
awareness and is all-inclusive,® and therefore the abode of guttural 
and labial energies (also), and in which inheres that creative 
I-consciousness, viz. aham which is the very quintessence of auto¬ 
nomy, which is the venerable phoneme, the highest mantra^ and 
is (always) inherent within. If one were to object, “in that undiff¬ 
erentiated mass of consciousness, how can there be a division like, 
this is the organ of utterance, this the articulation, this the letter 
etc.?** my reply would be: “that unbounded, absolute freedom 
brings about in the supreme Self of every one different apprehen¬ 
sions like ‘this is a jar* (external object); ‘this is happiness 
(internal object); ‘this is knowledge* {pramdna) ; ‘I am the kno- 
wer’ {pramatd or subject).** In this diversity of experiences what 
and how much is the exertion?’ . 

Therefore one and the same venerable supreme verbum {ekaiva 
parabkatfarikd), being all inclusive, abides as the highest ^rd m 
all, whether stone, tree, animal, man, god, Rudra, pralaydkala or 
vijndndkala {kevali), Majitra, Mantresvara, Man^amahesvara 
and others. Therefore, Mdtrkd whose body consist of letters 
(and sounds) which reside in various stations as their very sou 
either in indistinct {asphufa) or imperceptible {avyakta) way as 
in madhyamd or indistinct {sphufa) or perceptible {vyakta) way 
as in vaikhari is declared as the efficacious potency of mantra 
{rnaniravirya). 

Similarly it is said that the same note produced at dittere 
places in different instruments like the vindy vipanci (a vind wit 
nine strings), kacchapi (another vind with a tortoise-shaped sound¬ 
board), muraja (a kind of drum) is said to be belonging to the 
same register {ekasthdna) 


178 


Pard- Trihkd- Vivarana 


Simlarly, the basic or the starting note [sthdyi svara) in diff- 

-nd upper 

IceSrh " -d V.’ are pro^ 

palate Though ^^oniach, anus, throat, 

they are all right in Ln^elvesle^^^'’ f indistinct, 

apart from MdirJcd is impossible Tr f ^ phoneme 

less, they are useless thereV ’ u “distinct and meaning- 
say that this is not correct Th accepted, we 

stinct phoneme, such as the souTd ''of an indi- 

orofanoceaninasmuchasitkJ, (a kind of drum) 

sorrow. What othei utilii-,, • j bringing about joy or 

mostly those have been ch^ desired? In Saiva Sastra also, 

indistinct, for instance Cind.V^*^ mantra whose phonemes are 
dra etc. are said to be the sound oipranava in) ardhacan- 

that the mantra at the stave ^ mantra. It is also said 

The (indistinct) sound of "lakes only a hissing sound, 

as also been (agreeably 1 inH' ''^hich strikes the ear 

JOia. fthasbeensaidinGuhvavl^^- teaching about nada- 

as the tame ox bellows, as the^li^'"' Mantra: “As the horse neighs, 
g"«ural sound, even s^ the olw V’" 
"“g a mantra (of indistincf by mutt- 

(empirical beings). ThisT I the very life of 

ch IS used in drawing toward ^ ^Ppheation of mahdmantra 
be overpowered^. Thisl that which cannot 

In fact, “It is the inne^ ^ "^Pedient. 

both and meafongfi^f mantrad\ Mahdmantras 

both by you and us. phonemes can be easily used 

Inerefore, the ind* ‘ ^ 

s^me^TV^ plaSd p definitely of the form 

differenr^''! 'Pbat a^niT^” ^ distance is jar all the 

bird o V f through the diff though produced in 

Th f etc., is the sa bke that of ^ 

knowtr Z' pLan?r^^°"""te-this is also settled. 

Jrm “There can be a 

y now. Otherwise how can hi^y realized 

which is a commingh^S 


Ahhinavagupta 179 

of Word, object and idea {^abdarthapratyayandm) by mutual im¬ 
position {itaretaradhyaso) ^ and that acquisition of Supreme Genius 
'vhich can distinguish them in their minutest detail by means of a 
combined operation {samyama) oidharana (concentration), 
(nieditation) and samadhi (entranced attention) on each of them 
separately and in the knowledge of the cooing of birds etc. without 
^^eir distinct phoneme {asphiita varna)? When those indistinct 
P onernes also (i.e. the asphuta or indistinct phonemes like those 
^ birds etc.) acquire the status of words which have perfectly 
ear meaning (lit., whose meanings are really identical with 
^^ose Words) like distinct phonemes (yanidndmiva)^ then according 
So P^^^ciple mentioned, the cooing of birds and even the 
Co ^^Iccttle drum etc. become full of meaning. T.hen as the 
^^oing Qf has some meaning, even so the sound of drum may 
of either conquest or defeat (in battle). It is from 
c>f view only that the different Sutras of Siksa (the sci- 
^Cco articulation and pronunciation of words )^ etc., 

some 7za’ and visarga are to be pronounced ‘from 
the ^ According to others, they are to be pronounced ‘from 
^ise^^T teeth’, can have some sense, not at all other- 

is the reason why on the basis of slight difference, 
being in doubt about the different forms of pho- 
increased the list of phonemes to sixty-four by con- 

^ S the following as different phonemes: 

2, and upadhinaniya from visarjaniya}° 

fj. ^ ^'^^yama aksaras: fium, num, num, mm, miirn as different 
^®tn the five nasal phonemes ha, ha, na, na, ma though t ey 

3. ^ ^nly varied forms of the latter.^^ 

y taking the varied form of 4a, dha, ya, ra, la, va, ksa by 
of a short form of articulation as different from those 

‘Otters. 


In 


•:^n^ of phonemes, there is the same difference between 

between vowel and consonant. It has been sai 
ftined 1 "^^ktila also: “The Matrkd whose variety has been deter- 

^'^Itiplying eight by eight (8x8 = 64) alone should 
'^^ted as kulacakra (i.e. iakti cakra^^ Th^t kulacakra per- 
universe. The difference of these 64 pho^eme 

determined in detail in the work ‘Matykajhanabheda . 


180 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


Here (i.e. in Trika), there is no fondness for that procedure for 
integral wholeness or perfection is the essence of this system. So, 
there is such method of the entrance into the supreme conscious¬ 
ness everywhere. Whether in {safikalpyamdnah) or in 

kriyd§akti {kriyamdnah)^ every object rests on the superb splendour 
of the mantra of supreme verbum, viz. the pure, creative I-con- 
sciousness {vimarsdtma) which is one’s essential nature {svarupa-- 
bhuta) and which is non-mdyiya (non-empirical) and unconven¬ 
tional {asdnketika). It is that state which is lauded by all the 
schools of philosophy as indeterminate {nirvikalpa). That splen¬ 
dour of the supreme mantra {paramantramohah) is present in earth 
category etc. both in unmixed or mixed st e in the form of vowels 
{bija) and consonants {pinda) in phonemes hke ^kd" etc. Other¬ 
wise there would have been no difference between the deter¬ 
minate different pairs of knowledge, such as Meru-mountain 
and Jujube fruit, water and fire, jar (an external experience) and 
pleasure (an inner experience) and their indeterminate know’- 
ledge. Even determinate knowledge {yikalpa) which arises only 
from the heedlessness (of the indeterminate state) would have 
followed the same path (i.e. in that also there would not have been 
mutual distinction). On the contrary, it could not have been 
able to make the distinction-less indeterminate state as the basis 
of all distinctions. The fact is that the mantra (of I-consciousness 
or pardvdk) which transcends all conventionahty is taught as the 
object of worship by the all-knowing teachers even when they 
know that that mantra is the source of all the mutually distinctive 
conventions. It is, indeed, in that non-conventional splendour of 
the supreme verbum (ydnmahasi) i.e. into aham (I) that all em¬ 
pirical {mdyiya) conventional symbols so terminate that they i.e., 
the mdyiya (empirical) symbols attain identity with that trans¬ 
cendental, non-conventional mantra, viz., aham. The only signi¬ 
fication of those empirical {mdyiya) conventional symbols con¬ 
sists in the attainment of the experience of the essential nature of 
the non-conventional, there is no other signification of these sym¬ 
bols. By constant repetition when one enters the sphere of the 
non-conventional, one recollects clearly that the consciousness 
of the word (cow) attained in a remote past (or in a previous 
life) and later, on the occasion of conventional use, the conscious¬ 
ness attainable of a visible cow—both merge ultimately in a higher 


Abhinavagupta 

sphere of another kind of consciousness transcending conventiona¬ 
lity and beyond the pale of mdyd. Even in a child, there is at 
first, the predominance of only cit (pure, unconditioned consci¬ 
ousness). Therefore, even in the present life after a previous one, 
there exists in him a consciousness which transcends conventiona¬ 
lity. Otherwise there would be no support for his conventionality 
to stay. So it is on the basis of the non-conventional that there can 
be the possibility of the comprehension of the conventional, not 
otherwise. This is what was ascertained by venerable Utpala- 
deva in his commentary on Isvara-pratyabhijha.^^ 

The means for entrance into the non-conventional state is 
described in the following words by revered Kanthapada: 
‘^Where one sees something else, hears something else, does 
something else, talks something else, thinks something else, eats 
something else—in all such conditions, there is the stance of the 
non-conventional reality (i.e. it is the non-conventional that 
controls all these functions). The attention is cast elsewhere, 
the eye is directed elsewhere. That is how prdna always proceeds 
efibrtlessly.” (Sv. T. VII, 58). 

So, the conventional sign i.e., the determinate knowledge 
{savikalpaka jndna) pursuing its source terminates in the anuttara 
or the transcendental state. That transcendental state whose very 
nature is an eagerness always to exhibit that kind of multitudinous 
variety, always goes on expanding from the point of view of mani¬ 
festation {visarga). 

It is that impulsion to manifest that brings about expansion 
upto ‘Aa’ aspect. Of that, viz., of that impulsion to manifest 
{visargasya) there is the aspect of iaktUkuntfalini designated as hailf 
of‘Afl’ (in Trika) which assuming the shape of a dot {bindu) that 
is a means of identity with the essential nature of Siva, passes 
back again into the anuttara (transcendental) state, and thus rests 
in the essential nature. 

The consciousness symbolized by one phoneme, viz. ‘a* i.e., the 
anuttara or transcendental consciousness indeed by its very nature 
transcends all concept of space, time and causality and which, 
according to the previously stated principle, is wholly perfect, 
resorts instantly to the stage of para visarga^ i.e., the supreme 
stage of manifestation. 

It is only after connexion with the stage of para-visarga i.e. 


182 


Pa rd- TrUikd-VivaTona 


the supreme creative elan, that there is the stance of ananduy 
icchd, Uand, unmesa, its expansion, i.e. unatd or 5, its diversity i.e., 
Tj fj /, I and the product of kriydiakti viz. e, ai, o, au. 

That supreme, energy of manifestation {para or idmbhava visarga) 
becomes supreme-cum-non-supreme energy {pardpara) which 
expands because of its excessive plentitude and because of its 
being inseparably connected with that supreme energy {svasattd- 
ndntarikatayd) and instantly becomes the aspect of ‘ha’ i.e., apara 
visarga or external manifestation. It is the acquisition of the state 
oi‘ha\ i.e. external manifestation that actually brings about the 
existence of a network of innumerable categories symbolized by 
"ka’ etc. It is again this very ‘ha kald' or external manifestation 
which entering the bindu i.e., am of ‘aharn' terminates into the 
anuttara state. 


Thus It is that supreme venerable Goddess, the supreme ver- 
bum who IS only one, non-dual, wholly integral and perfect and 
who IS present as sarrivedanasattd, i.e. as vimariamayl-kriydiakti or 
conscious Creative Energy. There is no question of succession (of 
space, time and form) in this act of manifestation. In the aspect of 
manifestation, this is known as ‘aharn’ (a-ha-m) or Siva-Sakti-nara • 
inversely m the aspect of withdrawal this is known as ‘ma-ka-J 

or nam-Sakti-Siva. Though appearing as two, this is really one 
consciousness. ^ 


Thus, everywhere, even in the consciousness of jar (external 1 
or pleasure (internal) etc., it is the I-consciousness whose whole 
tieasure consists in calm repose within itself. As has been said bv 
Utpaladeva: ;TKe resdng of all objective andsubJeC^e ea- 
perience within oneself is what is meant by I-feeling” (Alai 
pramatr-siddlii, verse 22). In reality, that I-consciou!ness is fll- 
inclusive according to the principle already enunciated (viz. 
sarvani sarvatmakam-eveiything is in everything). That I con* 
sciousness is Bhairava Himself pervaded by the Supreme Energy. 
As^has been said by myself in the following hymn of praise: 

‘‘I make an obeisance, through my own joy, to that highest 
reahty which is wondrous delight {paramdrtha-camatkrti) which 
blossoms forth everywhere in the multitude of objects without 
cessation {bhava-patde parijndbhamdna viccheda-§unya), which is 
the I in the perfect mode of existence {purnavrtti ahamiti), which 
IS lull of lustre {devim), whose nature it is to shed light all round 


Abhinavagupta 


18S 


(prathanasvabhdvdni) and who abides in one’s own self {svdtmasthi- 
tirnY-K One should understand that this is the doctrine that has 
been taught in the Advayasampattivartika composed by Vamana. 
So it is settled that the phoneme only is endowed with fullest 
richness i.e., is perfect in every way. In words like ^harsa\ ^ghata\ 
^nila\ the letters etc. have to be combined together with 
the preceding and the following letters (in order to make a com¬ 
plete word). Otherwise (i.e., if the letters are not combined in 
a synthetic whole), if only the last letter is added to the group of 
letters such as ^ha\ etc., it would not form a complete whole, the 
word would be concealed within and would be unable to give 
rise to a concept.^^ 

Thus in all kinds of knowledge, all the divinities of letters 
{devatdhi.c.y vama-devatah) arising together simultaneously, woiJd 
bring about concepts of strange kinds. It is with this idea in view 
that in the chapter on kdla (time) in Svacchanda Tantra it has 
been described that in the duration of one breath, even in the 
sixteenth part or one tii^i or space covered by 2 J fingers of one 
breath (of a yogi), there are, along with an explanation of the 
passage of sixty or its double number of years, the rise and dis¬ 
solution of eight Matrkas, eleven Rudras, ten guardians of quar¬ 
ters {lokapdlas)^ twenty-seven constellations, eight Nagas and 
other divinities. Thus, timelessness is the highest truth of reality. 
If the highest Reality is what is to be decidedly the empirical 
{mdyiya) measure of tinith, it would only lead to atheism (in as 
much as it is beyond the empirical understanding). But in the 
supreme or transcendental consciousness, it appears immediately 
in that state (of timelessness). Therefore, what has been said, 
by way of teaching viz., ‘he sees something else, thinks something 
else*, etc., refers to one anuttara consciousness {ekasydmeva jndna- 
kalandydm) that anuttara or transcendental consciousness being 
the substratum (simultaneously) of the three divinities, viz. para 
{para vdk)^ pardpard {pa^yanti and madhyamd)^ and apard {vaikhari) 
is certainly invariable truth. Really speaking, the highest truth 
of all kinds of knowledge is I-consciousness. 

So this is established, viz., the supreme divine impulse to mani¬ 
festation {visarga in its aspect of prasdra or expansion) in its pleni¬ 
tude of beatitude {ananda-iaktibharitah) goes on ejecting the entire 
cosmos which is lying within it first as para visarga and then in its 


184 


Para-Trisikd” Vivarana 


progressive congealment, it becomes external manifestation (^ha* 
i.e., apara visarga) {hakdrdtmatdmpratipadya^ and the visarga simul¬ 
taneously goes on reabsorbing its manifestation in its aspect of 
samhara or withdrawal and after diverse combinations finally it 
becomes ksa This very emanation {sa eva esa visargo^ whose 
nature it is to give rise to a multitude of innumerable objects 
which spring up from the middle susumnd stage {madhyamasau- 
§umria padocchalat-tattadanantabhdvapaialdtmd)^ now making a com¬ 
bination of two consonants^® {A^^ydtmaka§dktayoni~samghatta^^vYL, 
of the appropriate consonants {Jza and sa^ which in active state 
resorts to^ a state in which there is no actual impact (andhata- 
nada-daJdsrayanena) (and thus) putting an end to all combination 
{viUisyan) enters the transcendental stage which is constant 
{dhruvadhdmni anuttarapade). This has been said even before.^® 


Notes 

< l>- there are 15 kalds (energies of letter) and 

ak IS the sixteenth kala. This is the essential nature of the Lord, 
his sixteenth kala of ah is known as visarga-kald. From ‘ka' to 
w c represents external manifestation, there is always 
prasara-sankoca (expansion-contraction), but the visarga-kald re¬ 
mains changeless in its nature. Inprdndyamaz.ho, fifteentehVgoon 
increasing or decreasing but the 16th tufi remains unchanged. 

til 1 ^ ^ ^ digits go on increasing or decreasing, but 

6th digit, the background of all and hidden from view, 
remains unchanged. 

visaed sakti or the emanative Energy of Siva is called 
amrta because in spite of all the changes brought about by the 

whateo^ energy does not undergo any change 


(a) Para visarga iakti: There are three phases of visargasakti- 
para, pardpard and apard. Pard is also known as Jdrribhava or ^aiva 
■ transcendental emanation, an interior emanation 

within the divine consciousness. It is the source and primary 
principle oiananda or the highest divine beatitude. It is represen¬ 
ted by the phoneme ‘a’. That is why it has been said to be para- 
mananda-bhumi. 


(b) Pardpard visarga-sakti or pardpard visarga'. 

This is known also as ^akti visarga. This is intermediate bet- 


Abhinavagupta 


185 


ween the para or supreme visarga and the apard or non-supreme 
visarga. It is, at the same tiitie, in imity with the non-dual supreme 
consciousness, and contains in a subtle way the potentiality of the 
empirical diversity. It is represented by the phoneme ^ah\ It 
is known as idkta visarga. 

(c) Apard visarga-iakii or apara visarga: 

This brings about the diversity of empirical manifestation, the 
manifestation of limited beings. This is why it is also known as 
dnava visarga. It is represented by the phoneme ‘Aa’. 

2. Sakti is said to be mouth {vaktra ) of Siva because it is through 
Sakti that one can get entry in Siva. The guru is also like Siva. 
Visarga-iakti is also like guru-mukha. Therefore in this context 
visarga-iakti is also called ^guru vaktra.^ 

3. It is difficult to bring out the double entendre used in this 
passage. Siva represents the male-principle and Sakti the female 
principle. Siva-Aya is the white semen of the male, and kusuma 
the red menstruation of the female. In the present context the 
bija is the svara or vowel and the female organ, is the conso¬ 
nant. Just as the combination of the male semen and the female 
sperm gives rise to fetus, so the bija of Siva 2indyoni of Sakti brings 
about the full consonant. 

4. Kusuma and puspa (lit. flower) are symbols of procreative 
energy. 

5. The union of Siva-^nAowa which is bija and Sakti-ZnAo^a 
which hyoni is known as Safkona mudrd. This is illustrated in the 
following diagram: 


^iva-trikotw 


PranutS (subjea) tixlistina 



Pranupa (knowledge) 
UiMinci 


Pianupa (knowledge) 
indistinci 



186 


Para- TrUika- Vivarana 


The three angles expressive of pramatd, pramdna and prameya in 
Siva are indistinct, while the three angles expressive of the same 
in Sakti are distinct. 

6. This refers to para vdk or supreme Verbum which is only the 
product of ^aham vimarsa' or the creative I-consciousness of Siva. 

7. A.G.’s reply means that the diversity of experience is not 
due to the effort of any individual but to the autonomous will 
of the Lord who has brought about manifestation in this fashion. 

^ 8. Sthana in this context is a technical word of music which 
m Western music is known as register. There are three sthdms 
m music, VIZ. mandra (low and deep sound), madhya (middle) and 
tdra (high), known as bass (low), middle and upper register. A.G. 
means to say that a note struck in a particular register in diff¬ 
erent instruments, though differing in the position of produc¬ 
tion m the different instruments, is always the same. 

t/’ pertaining to ardhacandra, nirodhi, tiada, ndddnta, 

a 2 , vydpini^ samand^ and unmand are avyakta (indistinct). 

10. Jihvdmuliya-. uttered from the root of the tongue, especially 

e vuarga before ‘A’ and kh, written as X % upadhmdniya: 
the as pronounced before y and written as X 
0 are num, man, nurn, nurri, murn. 

- his is how sixty-four phonemes are arrived at: 

a, b u, .r-pronounced short, long and prolatcd—(4 x 3) 

- =12 
1-short and prolated 

^5 0 , <2M-long and prolated 

Sparsa vamas from ka to ma 

Antahtha vamas i.e. ja, ra, la, va 

usma varnas or spirants ^a, sa, sa, ha 

Anusvdra and visavga 

Jihvdmuliya and upadhmdniya 

Tamas 


2 

8 

25 

4 

4 
2 
2 

5 


64 

13. The Isvara-pratyabhijna-tika of Utpaladeva is now lost. 
It is said to have contained six or eight thousand verses. 

14. Each word is a ‘gestalt’, an organized whole, in which the 
letters are synthetically combined in a unitary configuration. 



Abhinavagupta 


187 


15. The phoneme ^ksa* being a combination of A, s and 
denotes the union of Siva and Sakti. It is known as hufa-bija. 
Kufa is a technical name for a letter which results from the com- 
bmation of two halanta letters. The two halanta letters are k and 
§. The combination of ‘a’ makes it ksa. 

The phoneme ‘a’ itself descending at the level of becomes 
The phonemes ^ka\ and the belong to the 

same organ of articulation {akuhavisarjaniyandni kanfhah). 
is only another form of visarga. Ksa is the external symbol of Siva 
and Sakti. 

16. Dutydtmaka-idkta yoni is a technical term for consonant. 

Text 

From amicdkarddydh on p. 69,1. 3 upto svato rasdt on p. 74,1.27. 

Translation 

In accordance with the principle that there are sixteen tufi^ 
in one movement oiprdna^ the ‘a’ etc., viz. the 16 vowels while 
inhering within as phonemes divide the tufis into half and half 
and including the cessation in the first half and the rise oiprdrjxi 
into the second half, represent the fortnight of time (15 tithis) in 
the external world.^ These tithis are also said to be kalds or digits 
of the moon. When the sixteenth digit, which has the ^akti or 
power to expand {visargakald or amd kald) remains apart i.e., does 
not expand, it is designated the seventeenth digit in Sri Vadya 
and other scriptures in the following words:® 

“That 16th or visargdtmikd kald by itself becomes half of 
i.e. visarga (:) and further halioivisarga, i.e. bindu (.) Then it is 
known as the seventeenth goddess or kaldJ"^ Because of visarga 
being half of and further half of this hoing bindu, wliich is 
vUlesa, i.e. apart, not taking part in expansion is known as the 
17th kald,^ 

If it is objected, “How can there be division of one phoneme 
W (into 16th and 17th kalds), for ‘a’ which is anuttara is partless?” 
We reply, “In our system, every thing is partless, being non- 
different from the light of consciousness.” Just as, through the 
unimpeded autonomy of Siva, even when parts appear, partless- 
ness of Reality is invariable, even so is the case with Where 



188 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


is the inconsistency? Thus the propriety of the development of 
phonemes is maintained, because of the appearance of partless- 
ness in parts. Otherwise (on the occasion of utterance), how 
can the air whose nature it is to produce impact successively 
through the dental, labial, guttural, palatal phonemes strike 
the palate after having struck the throat? If it were to spread 
simultaneously in all the organs of articulation, then there would 
ensue simultaneity in the utterance of all the sounds. Conse¬ 
quently, the sound that is produced by impact of the air in the 
throat would become similar to the sound that is produced by 
impact in the palate. That which is experienced after breath and 
resonance is called ^ anupraddnam\^ In letters having two or three 
mdtrds^ i.e. in dirgha or pluta letters the inclusion of one or two 
mdtrds is implied. Similarly, in one mdtrd also, the inclusion of half 
a TTidtTd is to be understood. As has been said by Bhattanarayana \ 
‘T bow to Siva {sthdnu) who is citprakdsa above the three genetic 
constituents of prakrti, who is subtler than even half the mdtrd 
indicated on the top of‘om’ and greater than even a cosmic ees:”. 
(St. C. verse 7) 

Here the fifty phonemes or even the universe is one without 
succession. At some places in the Mata Sastra, etc., there is assu- 
med to be 18th kala or phase in the state resting on anuttara or 
the transcendental by means of the vUlesa or separation oivisarga, 
i.e. by means of the second dot, viz. the half of (:). So the 

phenomena of fifty phonemes or in other words the entire uni¬ 
verse is ‘one’ without succession. 

So these kalas, i.e., the phonemes ‘a’ etc. of anuttara are called 
svara on account of their revealing the delightful mental state. 
Ihe etymological explanation of svara is as follows. The root 
‘svf means (i) those which utter a sound {iabdayanti) i.e. indi¬ 
cate a delightful mental mode (sucayanti cittarn) and (ii) which 
(in the state of withdrawal) yield their essential nature to Siva, 
the highest subject {svarri ca svarupam atmanam rdnti)," i e which 
dissolve completely in anuttaraP Thus the word ^svarah’ means 
“those which transmitting their essential nature to the highest 
experient (i.e. anuttara) offer themselves i.e. get dissolved in 
anuttara (as vowels) (in the aspect of jamAam or withdrawal) and 
offer their form as consonants hke ‘Aa’ etc. i.e., display (existents) 
externally (in the aspect oiprasdra or expansion). These svaras as 


Abhinavagupta 


189 


mere sound {ndddtmakdh) are indicative of mental mode like 
pathos {karuna)y the amatory sentiment {srngdra), contentment 
(Jdnta) by means of lamentation, pleasing words, laudatory ex¬ 
pressions respectively either merely by themselves or by pene¬ 
trating consonants. They display mental modes even of animals, 
a day-old creatures by appearing suddenly, without the slightest 
trace of any hindrance of conventional sign etc., and by acqui¬ 
ring the form of exclamatory enimciation {svarakdkvddirupatdm 
aSnuvdndh)^ since they are so close to direct feeling. Thus uddtta 
etc., have been taught as having the characteristic of expressi¬ 
veness. They are indicative of mental mode by means of musical 
notes, such as sa^jd etc. Thus everywhere in all kinds of know¬ 
ledge, these phonemes from ‘a’ to ^ksa\ ingenious in bringing 
about varied acts, coming together in their several, distinctive 
forms [samdpatantyQ*harp, ahamikayd)^ (fundamentally) appearing 
without succession {akramam eva bhdsamdnah) displaying the transi¬ 
tion of forms one after the other by their effectuating powers 
{kalandmayatayaiva murtikramasai]^kramanam eva diJyamdnam) bring 
about spatial distinctions. 

Otherwise (i.e. in the absence of spatial distinction of forms), 
there would have been no difference between the Meru moun¬ 
tain and an atom. 

Thus these phonematic divinities enclose within themselves 
the varied activity of forms {kriydvaicitTydtTnakarji) expressive of 
spatial distinctions and (also) time expressive of succession, bring 
into prominence {ulldsayantyaf}) within {antar i.e. in prd^dra) 
and externally (in manifestation) devour i.e. absorb within the 
essential nature (the entire universe of objects). (Frompr<?//a5fl- 
samaye upto bhagavati srsfih, several ideas are telescoped into one 
another. Therefore, it is better to translate the sentence into 
parts.) 

In the process of interiorization : 

It enters the anuttara stage when udyoga^ avabhdsa^ caroaxia and 
vildpana are seized by pramiti kald (state of awareness) and by 
residing in the awareness state and developing and gradually 
being impregnated with 16 forms® of manifestation reach the 
perfect state. ^Tadamrtdnanda^ refers to r, f, /, f. They are known 
as amrta var^a inasmuch as they are not productive of any external 



190 


Para- Triiikd- Vivarana 


manifestation. So ‘tadamrtananda viSrdnlirupaTri’ means the im¬ 
mortal, essential, restful nature indicated by r, f, /, /. 

Having the state of this restful nature, and being of the es¬ 
sence camatkara, i.e. the Divine I-consciousness, projecting the 
external manifestation of the four kalds (aspects) of udyoga etc. 
(with reference to the limited empirical subjects, means of know¬ 
ledge, and objects), enjoying the swing oipurna and kria, i.e. intro- 
vertive and extrovertive emanation, expert in^ra^a or devouring 
i.e. in samhara or withdrawal of external manifestation and va- 
mana (emitting) i.e. prasdra or projection of extei'nal manifes¬ 
tation and weaving the network oisoma (the moon), symbolic of 
pratndna or means of knowledge of 16 kalds and surja (the sun), 
symbolic oiprameya or the universe of objects of 12 kalds, upholding 
in the beginning a , in the middle the group of consonants from 
'ka' to ksa i.e. the ‘Aa’ kald and the dot (i.e. anusvdra) at the end, 
I.e. m the form oi‘aharri\ the divine Mdtrkd (from ‘a’ to ’’ksd!) is 
the creative goddess.® 

So It has been said by Somananda in his commentary: 
h and awz are the modified and unmodified forms oi Mdtfkd. 

He maintains that the vowel ‘a’ denotes ‘anuttara’ (the Abso- 
ute), and the 15 vowels from a to ‘aid denote 15 tithis or lunar 
ays. Alternatively he has given another interpretation of the 
verse athadydh...tadantah‘\ viz. ‘am’ is symbolic of separately, 

the remaining fifteen vowels from ‘a’ to ‘ah' are denotative of 
htteen lunar days {tithis), but the final ‘ah' should be taken as 
e otative of visarga. At the same time, he has taught that the 
viscngais spanda , ke. the essential nature of Consciousness. ‘Spanda' 
IS defined as slight movement. If there is a going forth from one- 
se o another object (i.e. other than the self) it won’t be ‘slight 
movement, it would connote full movement. Otherwise (i.e., 
if there is-no going forth’ or movement from oneself), the very 
idea of movement’ would become meaningless. Therefore, it is 
Tpulsation within the essential nature (of 
the Self) consisting of succession-less wondrous delight (not be¬ 
cause o moving from oneself to another object) that it has been 
indicated in the Agamas by words, such as ‘ucchalattd' (jerking 
Up), urmi ( illow), matsyodarV (throbbing in the stomach of a 
fish). TWs is what is said to be ^spandcC (because of slight pul¬ 
sation within the essential nature of the Divine). This ‘spanda" 


Abhinavagupta 


191 


is of the nature of the union of Siva-Sakti. It is of two kinds— 
sdmanya (general) and viJesa (particularThis has been ex¬ 
plained already. 

The fifteen etc. are all the vowels ending in a dot, i.e. £mu^ 
svara (or arri^ the nasal ‘a’). They are the fifteen iithis or lunar 
days. At their end, through the connexion of kriydiakti {kola- 
yogena) occur what are known as soma (moon) and surya (sun) 
which constitute the terminal point of akula or anuttara (verse 5 ) 
i.e. the last vowel is ah of which the upper dot is symbolized by 
the moon and the lower is symbolized by the sxm. 

The earth and other categories of existence right upto quin¬ 
tuple brahma {brahmapancaka) i.e., ia, say say hay and ksa (the symbol 
of Sakti) repose in the vowels. How? The answer is ^kramdf 
(verse 6). 

The etymological meaning of kramdt is the following: ^^Krama-)r 
at which is derived from the root ^a(P ‘to devour’ means devouring 
of succession {krama^a adanam-bhaksanam) i.e., swallowing up of 
time {kdla-grdsahY\ Kramdt is used here in an adverbial sense 
i.e. ‘by swallowing up time*. 

^Suvrate^ in verse 6 means the following: su^Sobhana or magm- 
ficent. Vrata^ho\y practice. Suvratdy therefore, means one who 
has two holy practices, viz. (1) bhogau^.y enjoyment which consists 
in emptying her energy in manifestation {riktatve)y and (2) bhoga^ 
nivrtti i.e., abstention from manifestation or withdrawal of mani¬ 
festation in herself, thus making up the loss and becoming full 
[purnatve ). ^Suvrate* which is the vocative case of suvratd should be 
explained as above. 

Amuld in verse 8 means ‘who is rooted in ‘a*, and one who has 
no beginning or origin’ {avidyamdnamuld)y for she has no begin¬ 
ning (i.e. she is timeless, eternal).^* (Now A.G. explains amdld 
tatkramd.) 

She is kauliki iakti whose course {jkrama) is this i.e., whose course 
consists of identity {prailesana)y distinction {atadrupo)y identity 
cum-distinction {anyathdrupo). In spite of all these activities, she 
remains one whose origin has no beginning, one whose 

origin is unknown. 

(Now A.G. explains amuld-\-dtat’\-kramdb) 

^AtaV means extension or expansion of the one who is rooted in 



192 


Pard-Triiikd- Vivarana 


a, {(iMulasya yaddtananamdtat') . She is the one whose course or 
method is this extension {tadeva ca kramoyasydli) 

She is unknown {ajneya) for she is the knower of all (and, 
therefore, cannot be reduced to the status of the known), (from 
another point of view), she is the only one to be known, i.e. 
worth knowing {esaiva cajneyd), for anything other than she does 
not exist {anyasya abhdvdt). 

(Now A.G. gives the meaning of ^aksdntd' in the following 
words.) Aksdntd means ‘o' i.e., avidyamdnam ksdntam i.e., tusnim 
dsanamyasyah i.e. one who has no quiet seat or one who does not 
stey quiet; in other words ‘in whom there is no cessation of acti¬ 
vity by-way of manifestation etc.’ {aviratam srstyadi-rupatvena). 

(Now A.G., interprets the word dksdntd in the following way:). 
^ ‘afoa’means pertaining to ‘aksa' or the senses. So 

aksanta’^ would mean ‘one who does not end with the sensuous 
perception from before’ {aindriyakdndmante samipe prdgaparyavasdnd 
ya). is the adjective of jw/i. Figuratively, this means 

that this is manifestation in which there is an unparalleled taking 
away or seizure (apurvam dharanam), that is to say, in which there 
q 1 manifestation by way of entrance within the 

samhdra-rupaTii yasydm). 

This creative goddess, viz., Mdtrkd is the source of all vidya 
or nowledge assuming the form of vedand or inward feeling, indi- 
of Sakti, and as a product of germinal energy 
e orm of Siva-6i/a or vowels ^.-oAprasara or consonants, of the 
a n uteof protection or reflection of the wzaniraj in the form of 
vacyai.e. th^ devatds or inherent goddesses and their vdcakas or 
wor mgs. This creative goddess is the same everywhere i.e. 

neither less nor more (anywhere). She is said to 
bethe bestowerofsuccessinalltheTantras,in all the spiritual 
disciplmes, mall activities and at all times. ^Ikhydtd' (is said to 

Dej Has to be interpreted in another form also, i.e. d+akhydtd i.e. 

-?• is evident {prakata) in her state of 

a ya t i.e. m the state of self-forgetfulness, for in the stage of 
vatkkan or empirical utterance, the difference in the phonemes 
is due to mdya. Thus, those very phonemes existing in the mind 
as pure mantra^* at first (i.e. under the influence of mdyd), 
having leached the state of intellectual creation {bhdvasrsti) of 
the form of pratyayas i.e., thought-constructs like the fivefold 


193 


Ahhinavagupta 

viparyaya^^ a^aktP'^ etc., cast a pall over the essential nature (of 
the soul). 

“There are five varieties of viparyaya i.e., wrong knowledge. 
A§akti or inefficacy due to the impairment of the senses has twenty- 
eight varieties. There are nine kinds of tustP''’ or contentment. 
Siddhi^^ or fulfilment is of eight kinds.” These creations of the 
intellect {pratyaydh) (Sp. K. Verse 47) are primarily bonds 
{pd^ah) which pertain to the class of bound souls. As has been 
said in Spanda Karika; 

“The powers are ever in readiness to conceal his real nature, 
for without the association of words, ideas cannot arise.” Simi¬ 
larly, “The rise, in the bound soul, of all sorts of ideas marks the 
disappearance of the bliss of supreme immortality. On account 
of this, he loses his independence. The appearance of the ideas 
has its sphere in sense-objects”. (Sp. K. Ill, 14) etc. Therefore 
by setting aside the sphere which is the creation of the intellect, 
non-; 72^^<2 sphere of phonemes has been designated wliich is dis¬ 
tinctly audible, wliich is appreciable by means of the ear, wliich 
is the embodiment of the primal, highest purity of Siva, and which 
bestows the reward of various spiritual practices. In Purvasastra 
or Malinivijayottara Sastra also, it has been said: “The Lord, of 
His own accord thus illuminated Aghora with this method teeming 
with the sense of all the Sastras.” ‘‘Thus being awakened with 
the Lord’s teaching, exciting the vimar^a yoni with the Lord s 
powers, created innumerable mantras (i.e. inner phonemes) with 
suitable sounds for being employed by creatures of various cate¬ 
gories” (M.V.T. 111,27). 

“These mantras (inner phonemes) only being embraced by 
Aghora etc., the various mantra experients bestow on the mam 
users of them the fruits of all desires, not otherwise”. (M. V. HI? 
28). . 

Thus described, the mantras^ though manifest from the point oi 
view of phonematic creativity are unmanifest to those who are 
blinded by mdyd, 

(Now A.G. takes the word khyatdh as noun and explains it in 
the following manner:). 

^Sarvadaiva “They are always shining or manifest in 

the form of pure knowledge” or it may mean: “whose expansion 
is unimpeded according to the power of the nature of each . 


194 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 

The following is the sense of the whole teacliing in a concise 
form: 

“The Supreme Power, who is Bhairavi, whose characteristic is 
wondrous dehght issuing from her unique autonomy, shines ex¬ 
ternally by herself. He (i.e. Siva) who is in union with Her 
nature, who is unimpeded in His activity and is always present 
always shines as consciousness, whose essence is self-consciousness. 
He shines in the form of Sadasiva, earth, animals, blue, yellow, 
and pleasure that are an expression of His own nature (i.e. He 
shines without any external aid). Knowing every thing in its 
own form^® {svasvasamvedanam) is called means of proof. Tliis 
appears as common to all experients whether a child or an animal. 

The following are the pramdnas or means of knowledge: (1) 
sensuous knowledge or perception by means of the senses; (2) 
three kinds of inference (triruparn ca lifigam)^'^^ (3) the word of a 
great, credible personal {paravacahkramah), proof by analogy 22 
{svdrupya), inference from circumstance {anyathdyogaY’^^ cessation 
of a further desire to know {pratityanudaya) proof on the basis of 
non-existence {jamaY ^— all these are described simply as means 
to that self-consciousness whose light is never interrupted, which 
shines equally even in lower creatures like birds etc., which do 
not know perceptual or inferential proof even by name 

So the light of consciousness {bhasd) is by nature reflective of 
Self {svarupamariandtmika). That which is Self-consciousness is 
Itself the supreme Verbum {paravag-vapuh ). It is its very nature to 
appear m diverse forms of existence. Therefore, it shines as the 
cosmos of variegated existence. It never undergoes the state of 
dependence on others. As it is not dependent on anything (out- 
Mde Itself), how can any impediment possibly exist in it? There¬ 
fore, self-consciousness which is void of convention transcends all 
space, time, kala, mdya, limitation of place or activity. It is per- 
ect in Itself, it is the all and yet different from all forms and 
gures. It IS the natural, supreme consciousness characterized 
by excellent refinement, of the pure form of suddhavidya^’^, it is 
the aham or I in both ways, i.e. both as Siva and Sakti, both as 
consciousness and its expression as Energy. That ^aharrC (I) itself 
as Mdtrkd, is the very essential nature of earth etc. In the highest 
sense, its fluid form is said to be the vowel {bija) and the solid 
form the consonant (joni), the very nature of Siva and Sakti. 


Abhinavagiipta 


195 


By the union of Siva and Sakti (i.c. vowel and consonant), by 
their mutual union crops up the delight of the visible universe. 
The virile energy (of anuttara or I-consciousness) which is the 
highest reahty {pdramarthika-sadvapuh) and which is present in the 
universe inherent within up to its extreme limit is designated as 
visarga both in its aspect of 'vi^lesa' i.e. external expansion or 
prasdra and its aspect of ^yojand^ i.e. inward withdrawal or sam- 
hdra. This visarga is the invariable domain (of the aspirants), 
tliis the easy means of attaining to anuttara. In Sri-Purva (i.e. 
MMini-vijayottara), a phonematic creation from na to pha has 
been described which is different from this non-mdyiya multitude 
of phonemes i.e. the Mdtrkd group from to ^ksa\ That is 
known as Mdlini which is bhinna^ i.e. mingled with vowels and 
consonants and is formed with reference to mdyd. 

Khecari-vaisamya or the State of PaJu 

The Mdlini being divided into fifty phonemes at the stage of 
mdyd gives rise to vikalpas or thought-constructs. In this form, 
it is by nature such that it casts a pall over the essential nature 
of the Self and leads to bondage of the empirical selves. Involved 
in this phonematic creation, the various khecari ^aktis lead to vai- 
samya or dis-similai ity of the essential nature, and carry out the 
recurrence of the variegated cycle of temporal existence full of 
the kdrmika^ mdyiya^ and dnava limitations. 

Khecaii-sdrnya or the State of Pati 

Khecari^ by nature, has the sameness or identity with pure 
Bhairava. This has already been said. In khecari sdmya^ it is the 
highest state i.e. the state of Siva^® or pati both in life and libera¬ 
tion. The highest aspect of non-differentiation in the phonematic 
creation of difference is the virility of the mantra by the preserva¬ 
tion of which the mantra is preserved. This sdmya is ^aham (I) 
itself or which is the visarga status of anuttara. When the awakened 
one realizes it as his supreme nature, he is forthwith liberated in 
life itself. 'Thjtyogis who desire supernormal powei etc., by means 
of this I-consciousness meditate on aharn in a limited way in the 
navel or the heart-centre. I have briefly concluded it according 
to (the teaching of) my guru and the Agamas. As to what hap¬ 
pens by resorting to this I-consciousness, ask your personal ex- 


196 


Pa ra- Trliika- Vivarana 


perience. I have only shown a little bit of the path. One should 
not rest contented with this much. 

Who can say with certainty ‘this much is all’ regarding the 
divine consciousness? The divine grace has been vouclisafed to 
me only to this extent. By that (grace), I have been privileged to 
disclose this much (as means) (viz., khecari samya or identity with 
the divine consciousness). Subtler then this (i.e. sat-tarka) 
may occur to other experients either today (in the present) or at 
some other time (past or future) i.e., the tarka^’’ either may occur 
in the present {bkavati), or occurred in the past (abhut), or will 
occur in the future {bhavitd). Among all the lights of the com¬ 
ponent parts®® oiyoga, this (i.e., tarka) has been determined in 
Sri Purva Sastra (i.e. Malini-vijaya) as the brilUant sun {gabha- 
shman) by which one gets liberated and liberates others. This 
(i^., tarka) should be clearly understood in every way and 
reflected on by the clear-sighted ones {vicaksanaih) desirous of 
the supreme state {parepsubhih) by abandoning for a moment 
jealousy common to mortal beings. The aspirant is established 
m the genual nature of the Self immediately after sat-tarka 
{alocana) and, therefore, the specks of cloud®® that cover the sun 

delio-bt dissolved automatically by the savour of 

aelight that the aspirant experiences at this moment. 

Notes 

. Tutiis a division of breath. It covers an extension of 

cludW of breath (in- 

coversln efr expiration). One round of breath thus 

covers an extension of 36 fingers. 

and rkin^^ known as pranacdra, 

brdnacdra^th within is known as apdnacdra. In 

known as 

h -f, ^ i point where it ceases externally is known 

as bahyadvddaJdnta. On thf-r^th^r. u a ■ “iiy is jiiiowu 

t Other hand, in apanacdra, the external 

p e prana arises is known as bdhyadvddasdnta and the point 

where it ceases internally is known as antahdvddaidnta. The space 
between th^e two dvddaidntas is 36 fingers or 16 tutis. These 16 
tutis cover the 16 vowels from ‘a’ to ‘ah\ The vowels from ‘a’ to 
m represent the fifteen tithis or lunar days in the external world. 
Th^ pranacdra represents the 15 tithis of the dark fortnight, and 


Abhinavagupta 


197 


apdnacdra represents the bright fortnight. The vowel ah is change¬ 
less. It represents the 16th digit of the moon which is changeless 
and is known as amd kald, 

3. The visargdtmikd kald is said to be divided into two by itself 
of which the successive kald is known as the 17th. 

4. When visarga kald is involved in manifestation or expansion, 
it is known as visarga ( i); when it ceases from manifestation, it 
is known as vindu or bindu (.). In Trika philosophy, ordinarily 
both visarga and vindu are known as visarga^ for in the aspect of 
samhdra, visarga becomes vindu and in the aspect srsti, vindu is 
visarga, Visarga-vindu is in all conditions eternal and immutable. 

5. AnupraddnarriL \ This is a technical word of Sanskrit Gram¬ 
mar. It is an effort outside the mouth in the production of sound 
at the different vocal organs which is looked upon as external 
effort or bdhyaprayatna. 

There are three main factors in the production of sound, viz. 

(1) sthdna, (2) karana or dbhyantara prayatna^ (3) anupraddna or 
bdhyaprayatna. There are two main varieties of anupraddna^ known 
as (i) ijvdsdnupraddna (emission of breath) and (ii) nadanupradana 
(resonance), [vide, "A Dictionary of Sanskrit Grammar’ by K.U. 
Abhyankar, p. 23 ]. 

6. So long as ‘a’ etc. are only an inner apprehension, they are 
known as kald and when they assume an external sound, they 
are known as vowels or svara, 

7. The anuttara principle accepting the limited condition of 
pramdtd (knower),pr<2m5;2a(knowledge) dindprameyay (the known), 
manifests the universe as something external. There are four 
aspects of this manifestation, viz. udyoga^ avabhasa, carvanay and 
vildpana, 

(1) Udyoga is the initial preparation in the form of Will. 

(2) Avabhdsa is the appearance of a mental experience, e.g., 
blue as something external. 

(3) Carvana i.e. relishing the above experience for some 
time as a form of the I-consciousness. 

(4) Vildpana i.e. withdrawal or re-absorption of the ex¬ 
panse in the essential nature of the Self. 

Even in the work-a-day pragmatic experience, these aspects are 
at play, for instance at first there is will to perceive ajar {udyoga) y 


198 


Para-TrUikd- Viuarana 


then there is the actual perception of the jar {avabkdsa), relishing 
of the perceptive experience {carvana), and finally assimilating the 
perceptive experience of the jar to the essential nature of the Self. 

When the above {udyoga, avabhdsa, etc.) without bringing about 
the limited experience of the knower, known, etc., reside in the 
pure state of awareness, it is the perfect pard-iakti of 17 kalds. It is 
a state of pure awareness in which inhere 16 forms of experience. 

The four forms of pramdtd^ pramdna^ prameya and mdyd multiplied 
by the four forms of udyoga^ avabhdsa^ carvana and vildpana make up 
16 forms. 

The perfect form of pramiti^ therefore, is 1 kald of the pure 
pramiti itself plus the above 16 kalds inherent in it, i.e. of 17 
kalas. This perfect(awareness) is or autonomy, 

the. third eye of Siva, symbolic of sanihara-mudra. 

8. This is the form of 16 kalas of the goddess. This does not 
include the perfect pramiti kala. This is called the somanetra or the 

unar eye of Siva. This is expressive of prasara-mudra, the state of 
external expansion. 

9. Thus there are three states, viz.: 

(1) Pramiti which is signified by Agni, which is known as 
the bhdla netra or the central eye of Siva. It is a state of 
pure awareness, perfect or purna, which including the 
16 vowels from a to ''aK is of 17 kalds. This is only an 

without any external manifestation. 

(2) The Right Eye {daksina netra of Siva). This is also 
known as soma kald or pramdt^a-kald. This indicates the 
external manifestation of the inner 16 vowels. The 
piamdtd, pramdna, prameya and mdyd multiplied by udyoga, 
avabhdsa, carvana and vildpana (4x4) work out to 
sixteen. 

^ ^ Left Eye (ydmanetra^ oi^iva .—also known as Surya 
ad or prameya kald is the^ external manifestation of 12 
a ds without the play of r, f, /, / i.e. when these phone¬ 
mes are in a state of vUrdnti or rest in pramiti. Pramdtd, 
pramdna, and prameya multiplied by udyoga, avabhdsa, 
etc. (3x4) work out to 12. 

f designated ‘a/t’ as vikrta or modified form 

ol Matrka, because it denotes external manifestation, and ‘am’ as 


Abhinavagupta ^ 

avikrtay because it denotes introversion. is centrifugal, there¬ 
fore, vikrta or modified; ‘am’ is centripetal and therefore, avikrta 
or unmodified. There is sahkoca (contraction) and vistdra (diffu¬ 
sion) simultaneously in the heart of Siva. Both are denoted by 
the common word ^visarga\ There is no such common word in 
English. 

11. Movement {calanavi) in this context is not to be taken in 
the sense of physical movement. It is an inward pulsation or throb 
in Consciousness denoting the ever-present activity of the delight 
of Self-consciousness of the Divine. It is the dynamic activity of 
Consciousness. It is motionless movement so to speak. Just as a 
wave in the ocean rises up only in the ocean itself but does not 
move out, even so ^spanda^ is a throb in the divine consciousness 
of Siva-Sakti. 

Spanda is of two kinds, sdmdnya (general) and viiesa (particular). 
Sdmdnya spanda is the foundational spanda of 6iva-Sakti, on which 
is based the working of the gunas of prakrti which are the vUesa 
spanda, leading to particular experiences of psychic and physical 
phenomena. The particular experiences are popularly known 
as the spanda of Sakti. 

12. ‘AmuW has also been used in two senses, viz. (1) midam 
yasydh^ which means that is the origin of the entire phonematic 
manifestation and (2) ^avidyamanam inulam yasydh* which means 
that ‘being beginningless {anddi), it has no origin othei than t e 
essential nature of anuttara\ 

13. The sense of this is that the entire phonematic manifestation 
is only <2^(7/or expansion of‘(2’. 

14. So long as variias or phonemes exist only in the mind, tie) 
are known as mantra. Usually, it is only when they aie uttere 
by the vocal organs that they are knowm as varria. 

15. ^Sva-sva-samvedand^ is of tw’’o kinds (i) Hvdtma a 
samvedana born out of prdtibha-jndna i.e., knowledge born o spon 
taneous divine influx w’hich ensures a knowledge of iva in 
every object, (2) perceptive knowledge through the senses, as 

that of a jar. . 

16. The five kinds of viparyaya are (1) Tamos or dai \ 

Moha (delusion), (3) Mahdmoha (great delusion), (4) dmisra 

(gloom), {b) Andhatdmisra (blinding gloom). 

17. Aiakti or inefficacy due to the impairment of the senses is 


200 


Para- TriUkd- Vivarana 


of 28 kinds—11 due to defect in the senses and 17 due to imper¬ 
fection in buddhi. 

^ 18. The nine kinds of tusti are (i) Prakrti, (ii) Upaddna, (iii) 
Kala, (iv) Bhagya, (v) Arjana, (vi) Raksana, (vii) Ksaya, (viu) 
Sanga, (ix) Hirrisa. 

The eight kinds of JzWAf are (I) (2) &abda, (3) Adhya- 

yana\ prevention of three kinds of duhkha, viz. (4) Adhydtmika 
duhkha, (5) Adhibhautika duhkha, (6) Adhidaivika duhkha (7) Suh- 
rtprdpti, (8) Dana. For details see Samkhya Karika, Verses 47-51. 

19. ‘Aghora’ is Anantabhattarakanatha. 

20. The three kinds of inference are (1) Purvavat, (2) Sesavat 
and (3) Samanyato-drslam. 

(1) Purvavat literally means ‘as before’. It has been noticed 
before that whenever there is cloud, there is rain. So, now when 
cloud is noticed in the sky, the inference is that it will rain. It is 
an inference from cause to effect. 

(2) Sesavat is an inference from the part to the whole. If a 
ttle water of the ocean when tasted appears to be saltish, the 

Talthh ^ ‘Conclusion is that the remaining water must also be 

(3) SdmdnyaMrstamx As Caitra who is now seen in Prayaga 
ter seen in Kasi leads one to infer that he moves about even 

they“oveIb„“ 

21. This IS known as inference based on dptavacana i e on the 

Zt ' ““ knoJn'ZZ 

feZZm SclZ " a™"" “ 

.lay and Ke i, s.out.TKeZZsTnZZ Zt""* Z 

eating at night. ence is that he must be 

further desire to kZZZ"’' 

.hhg, IZterTZ T of a 

placf. o^ost be cats in this 


Abhinavagupta 


201 


26. Suddhavidya refers to Siva-vidya or Sahaja-vidya, not to 
Suddhavidya tattva. This is khecari in the primal form, not the 
consciousness of the empirical individual, but the consciousness 
of Siva. It is the universal activity of the supreme energy of Siva. 
It is the identity with this khecari (khecari’-samata or khecari-samyd) 
which is the object of Devi’s enquiry and the aim of every 
aspirant. 

27. Tarka means reasoning. This is known as sat-tarka or the 
true reasoning. It is reasoning in conformity to the teaching of the 
Agama. It does not mean logic-chopping. 

28. The component parts oiyoga are, according to Saivagama, 
six, known as sadahga. These six limbs or component parts are: 

(1) PrdJidydma, (2) Dhydna^ (3) Pratydhdra^ (4) Dhdrand^ 
(5) {Sat)-Tarka^ Samddhi, 

29. The specks of cloud refer to the dnava mala of the soul that 
is automatically dissolved now. 

Text 

From evamuttarasydpyanuttaramiti on p. 75, 1. 14 upto kriydiakti- 
samarpanamuktam on p. 79, 1. 9. 

Translation 

Introduction to the succeeding Sutras: 

Thus it has been said earlier (in verse 3) viz. ‘‘that is anuttara^ 
even of uttara'\ From the portion ‘it is anuttara even of uttara 
it has been described in detail that the expansion of manifestation 
(consisting of 36 tattvas) is due to kula or Sakti. It has been deter¬ 
mined that even the subsequent one i.e. expansion of the universe 
has the anuttara or the transcendental as its precedent. Now 
it is the nature of the transcendental which requires a detaile 
consideration. So while considering both prescriptive rule 
and explanatory reiteration {atiuvdda), the nature of both vi i 
and anuvdda has to be characterized. In the mental recitation o 
the name of Siva (which is vidhi)^ and the appearance o a 
happiness (which is anuvdda) both are discernible. Thoi^h m 
this system, anuttara or the transcendental is nothing di eient 
from the uttara or the posterior—for if it were something other, 
that would also fall within the category of the uttara^ even then 


Pard-TrUika-Vivarana 

there is this difference brought about by the autonomy of the 
Lord from the point of view of the disciple and the teacher. 
Therefore, a quotation of further verses is given in order to deter¬ 
mine the nature of the transcendental in detail. This is what it 
describes: 


CATURDASAYUTAM BHADRE 

TITHISANTASAMANVITAM// 9 / 
TRTlYAM BRAHMA SUSROI^JI 

HRDAYAM BHAIRAVATMANAH / 
ETANNAYOGINIJATO 

NARUDRO LABHATE SPHUTAM// 10 / 
HRDAYAM DEVADEVASYA 

SADYO YOGAVIMUKTIDAM / 
ASYOCCARE KRTE SAMYAl^ 

MANTRAMUDRAGAIS^O MAHAN// 11 / 

sadyastanmukhatAmeti 
svadehaveSalaksanam / 
muhortam smarate yastu 

GUMBAKENA ABHIMUDRITAH// 12/ 
SA BADHNATI TADA SARVAM 

mantramudraganam narah / 
atItAnAgatAnarthAn 

PRSTO’SAU KATHAYATYAPI// 13 / 

praharadyadabhipretam 
devatArgpam uccaran / 
saksat paSyatyasandigdham 

AKR§TAM RUDRASAKTIBHiy// 14 / 
PRAHARADVAYAMATRENA 

VYOMASTHO JAYATE SMARAN / 
TRAYEljJA MATARAIJ SARVA 

YOGISVARYO MAHABALAH// 15/ 
ViRA VIRESVARAIJ SIDDHA 

BALAVAN CHAKINIGANAH / 

Agatya SAMAYAM DATVA 

BHAIRAVENA PRACODITAH// 16 / 


Ahhinavagupta 


203 


YACCHANTI PARAMAM SIDDHIM 

PHALAAI YADVA SAMiHITAM / 

ANENA SIDDHAH SETSYANTI 

_SADHAYANTI CA MANTRII^AH// 17 / 
YATKINCID BHAIRAVE TANTRE 

sarvamasmAt prasiddhyati / 

ADRSTAMAISfDALO’ PYEVAM....// 18 / 

Translation 

The Description of Amrtabija or Sank mantra 

O thou gracious one, thou with beautiful thighs, it is the third 
brahma} (i.e. sat or rather united with the fourteenth vowel 
(i.e. au) and well-joined with that which comes at the end of the 
lord of the vowels*- (i.e. visarga), {Sa-{-ciu-{-visarga = sauh)» This 
is the heart^ of Bhairava. Or this sank or amrtabija is the bhairaviya 
hr day a of the narabhava or phenomenal aspect which is only of the 
essence of Sakti {trtiyam brahmabhairavdtmdnak nah bhairavdtma 
hrdayarn. nah in this syntax means asmdkam i.e. of our system). 
9-10. 

He who is not born yogini^ or is not united with Rudra^ 
cannot clearly obtain this (i.e., sauh). This is the (very) heart 
(ne. hrdaya-bija, the mantra sank) of the God of gods It., parama 
Siva, and bestows immediately (both) yoga^ and liberation. 10-11. 

When this mantra (i.e. sauh) is perfectly well recited*’ the 
grand multitude of mantras and mudrds immediately appears be¬ 
fore him (i.e. they become favourable to him) being characteri¬ 
zed by their absorption in his body {svadehave§alaksanam), 11 - 12 . 

The man i.e. t\\^yogi (i.e., in tliis context) who has a mindful¬ 
ness® of this mantra even for a muhiirto} or forty-eight minutes is 
sealed with ciimbaka}^ and binds i.e., brings under his control the 
entire multitude of mantras and mudrds. He also narrates past and 
future events, when interrogated. 12 - 13 . 


*Thc word uccdra which literally means ‘to recite or to sound' is used here in 
a technical sense, viz. (1) full realization of in the form of vimaria or (2) 
joining sauh with the current oiprana and apdna according to the instruction of 
the guru. 



204 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


If he calls up the form of any divinity that he desires, for a 
prahara i.e., 3 hours, he sees it with his eyes, without doubt, drawn 
near to himself by the powers of Rudra. 14. 

If he has the mindfulness of a divinity for two praharas, i.e. 
six hours, he becomes established in the expanse (lit. sky) of pure 
consciousness. 15a. 

If he continues the above practice for three praharas i.e. nine 
hours, then all the mothers,^^ all the greatly powerful 
the viras^'^ vlre^varas^^ the siddhas^^^ the multitudes of powerful 
§okinis^^ impelled by Bhairava, come to Ixim after making an 
appointment^" and offer to him the supreme felicity viz. moksa 
supernormal power or the fruit desired by him. By this bijamantra^ 
i.e. sauh^ the practisers of the mantra are practising yoga in the 
present {sadhayanti)^ by its practice they became perfect in the 
past {siddhati) and by this they will gain perfection in future 
{setsyanti). 15-17. 

All the perfections described in Bhairava Tantra are accom¬ 
plished by this bijamantra (i.e. sauh^. This amytabija removes enti¬ 
rely the sense of difference prevalent in the mdylya anda (the sphere 
of On the other hand, being the heart of every object and 

state, it also abides, having accepted the limitation prevalent in 
all the four andas. 18. 


Commentary 

The Explanation of Bhairavdtmanah hrdayarn etc. 

The essential nature of the universe which is simply a form of 
Bhairava, which by demonstrated experience {pradariita)^ rea¬ 
soning {yukti) (in accordance with the teaching of the guru), and 
gama (the traditional teaching) is ascertained to be venerable 
apard or non-supreme manifestation is sdkta i.e., pertaining to 
Sakti. The heart or the essence of that §dkta nature is Siva who 
is held in firm embrace by the divine Sakti, viz. the venerable 
supreme power {para). 

By the word Bhairava’ is to be understood Sakti, the Divine 
Eneigy, of the universe according to the principle that every¬ 
thing is the form of everything else {sarvasarvdtmakatd vapuh). 
The heart or the essential nature of the phenomenal reality 
{nara rupasya) permeated by that Sakti is Siva who is identified 


Abhinavagupta 


205 


with the supreme non-difFerentiation {parena abkedena) by the 
above principle, for w^ithout this even differentiation would not 
be possible i.e. if Siva and Sakti were not prevalent in phenomenal 
reality, its state of difference would not have been possible. This 
has been stated before. Sidroni (O with beautiful liip and thighs), 
IS the vocative case. (A.G. by splitting bkairavdtmanah into two 
i.e. bhairavdtma and ^nah^ and by adding hrdayam with sicironi and 
turning it into a compound word, viz. su^roni-hrdayam gives the 
following explanation:) 

That which is irremovably involved even in repugnant mdyd 
and consists of pure consciousness is the core between the two 
thighs, viz., the female organ {yonirupam) . The Sakti in the form 
oiyoni (female organ) is the state of Bhairava that indicates the 
wholeness {purnatd) of the nara~bhdva or phenomenal reality 
which includes within itself the entire host of experients from 
sakalas (i.e. limited experients), (divinities like) Mantra, Mantra- 
inahesvara down to immobile beings (like plants etc.) whose very 
life consists of empirical I-feeling and which is rightly designated 
as ‘ours’ {nah). 

The Explanation of trtiyam brahma 

Brahman (accepted in Trika) is that in whom the virility of the 
universe is inherent and who is full of the mass of bliss {dnanda^ 
^aktighanarri) that is surging forward for visarga-vUlesana i.e. visarga 
or separation from Siva and viilesana or union with Sakti. Such 
Brahman is vast {brhat)y all-pervading {vydpaka) and fully nurtu¬ 
red with the union of Sakti. This Brahman is certainly not like 
that which is accepted by the readers of Vedanta and which is 
not far removed from absolute nihilism. This is called the third 
Brahman, because it is more identical with Siva than nara or 
Sakti. Therefore, in Tantras and particularly in Paratrisika 
{atra)y this i.e. the union of the male principle and the female 
principle is the very core which has been taught as the object of 
worship. Even in the case of ordinary people whose mind has 
not penetrated into the core of that sort of virility, by the mere 
pursuit of external ritual, the bonds that govern the state oipa^v}^ 
(limited empirical being) become at first gradually slack and 
finally completely loosened, at first slowly splitting and then 
finally completely split asunder and then they automatically 


206 


Pa rd~ Trl^ikd- Vivarana 


attain to the state of penetrating into that core (which is the union 
of Siva and Sakti). This penetration into the core is not like a 
literal statement as in ‘T have entered the heart, it is the supreme 
goddess”, rather it is the search inside the heart. This has been 
already said in detail. “Neither the restrictions of Sastras (reli¬ 
gious texts) can confine the heart within narrow limits, nor can 
popular views contaminate consciousness. That alone is the state 
of plenitude which is infused with the joyful condition of absorp¬ 
tion or khecari sdmya which is completely replete with the attri¬ 
bute of the essential nature of the Divine”. As has been said by 
myself in one of my hymns: “In those whose mind has been made 
purer by being fully dominated by devotion unto you, this state 
is clearly established in the heart in a moment.” Therefore on 
the angles (i.e. pard^ pardpard and apard) of the triangular Sakti, 
the three goddesses and in the centre the transcendental goddess 
who is the churning Sakti of Bhairaya, the embodiment of supreme 
beatitude^^ have to be worshipped. In the tradition of the deities, 
there is bliss through ksobhdtmaka visarga which is due to the inces¬ 
sant flow of bliss of the eternal beatitude. Inydmala or vira-yogini 
or vira-duti tradition, there is physical union {samghatta) between 
the vira and yogini. The purpose is only to stimulate the nityd- 
nanda or eternal beatitude by means of the contact of sex-organs. 
By this contact, there is ksobhdtmaka visarga. It gives intense 
delight.2^ In a single person {ekaviratdydmapi) occurs also by con¬ 
centration of the mind on the essential delight of the Self the 
same (sexual) dehght. In the case of the ordinary run of man¬ 
kind, on the occasion of intercourse, on account of the close 
compactness of the union of the sexual organs of the man and the 
woman right from the deepest part upto the foremost part, the 
mind of both is dissolved (in the supreme Sakti), and the delight 
that resides in the ejaculatory part of the sexual organ of man and 
the nether aspect of the triangular region i.e. thejvonf or the female 
sexual organ is consequently exceedingly generated.In this 
connexion, the mystic sense of the intercourse has been expressed 
in the following verse: 

“One should throw (i.e. concentrate) the delightful mind in 
the middle of vahni (the region of contraction) and visa (the 
region of expansion) both ways, whether by itself or permeated 
by vdyu (pranic breath). One would then be joined to the bliss 


Abhinavagupta 


207 


of sexual union”^^ (V. Bh. verse 68). Thus it is the association of 
beatitude which is the worship of the ‘heart’ i.e., the essential 
nature of parddevi. 

As has been said in Trikatantrasara:^'* 

“The expansion of beatitude is ‘worship’. One should per¬ 
form this worship on the Trikona (triangle)^® with sweet smell 
like that of flowers, incense etc., which give satisfaction to the 
heart.” Everything is pervaded with two mudras which are essen- 
tially jiidna and kriyd ^akti. Only among deities, the display of 
jndna-mudra or ^iwdi-trikona is prominent internally and that of the 
display of kriya-mudra or ^dAiti-trikona is external, whereas among 
the viras, it is just the reverse. So far as the entrance in the region 
of delight or madhya-dhama i.e. susumnd is concerned, there is both 
similarity and difference. It is from this point of view that it 
has been mentioned that the kriyd§akti or the symbol of the female 
organ should be offered to jndnaJakti or the symbol of the male 
sexual organ. 


Notes 

1 . Trtiyam brahma : The usual nomenclature of brahma is 
aum tat sat; Sat is the third brahma. ‘iSa’ with which begins the 
third brahma^ viz. ^sat^ is symbolically designated as the third 
brahma. 

2. TithUa or the lord of the vowels is ‘am’. At the end of this 
comes ah or visarga. So sauh is the mantra that indicates anuttara 
or the transcendental. 

3. Heart or hr day am is the centre of Bhairava. It is the prati-^ 
slhdsthdnam —the place of repose of the Lord. In his commen¬ 
tary on verse 2 in P.T.V., A.G. says ^^param pratisthdsthdnarri 
samvidatmahrt^ ^heart is the very consciousness oianuttara; it is 
its most interior place of repose, the very centre of consciousness. 
In his commentary, L.V., A.G. explains it as Bhairavdtmano 
bhagavatah iabdaraJeh vUva^arirasya hrdayam sdrabhutarrC^• If we take 
the universe as a body, it would be its very heart, i.e., the very 
essence of the universe which in other words, is a mass of sound 
(congealed). Commenting on the word ^hrdayairC occurring in 
verse 9, A.G. says in P.T.V. that it isyonirupam^ the source of all 
creative energy. 

4. Ordinarily,^a^/wzj are those initiated ones who have acquired 


208 


Pa rd~ TrUikd- Vivarana 


supernatural powers. Here the word seems to be used for those 
deities who are liberated and identified with Siva. 

5. Rudra in this context, also appears to be a liberated soul, 
identified with Rudra Siva. 

6. The word ^yoga!" stands here for supernatural powers and 
union with Siva. 

7. Samyak ticcdra in this context does not mean mere vocal 
recitation, but silent, spontaneous, subtle movement of the mantra 
within. It is its union with the breath that leads to realization. 
Commenting on this in his L.V., A.G. says: ^^Asya bijasyoccdre 
prdnarupatdydrn samdveiena tavdt hrtamdtra eva jndnakriydsakti-§arvrd 
mantramudrdh sadya eva sammukhatdm uccdrayitur dbhimukhyam prati-- 
padyante‘\ 

“When by the uccdra of this mantra^ the yogi becomes totally 
absorbed in prdnuy then by that alone, the mantras and mudrds 
which are the embodiment of knowledge {^jndna^ and activity 
{kriyd) turn towards yogi who is reciting the mantra and offer 
him all that he desires.” 

8. Smarate does not simply mean memorizing but constant 
attention on the mantra. That is why it has been translated as 
‘has a mindfulness’. 

9. Muhurta = two ghatikas. One = 24 minutes. So muhu- 
rfa = 48 minutes. 


^ 10. Cumbaka is iakta sparia, the embrace of Sakti cakra occurring 
in susumna or madhya n&di. Cumbaka means magnet. Just as a 
magnet draws iron-filUngs towards itself, even so the mkta-sparia 
draws the aspirants toward itself. 

refers to the eight deities Yogisvari, Brahmi, 
Mahesvari, Kaumari, Vaisnavi, Varahi, Aindri and Camunda 
o various groups of phonemes. 

1^. The/ are chiefs of the yoginis. 

P T V L L.V. that the vitas are Aghora etc. In 

af (intellect), and organs 

warftw ta«™verMd to- 

.It'jTZT ‘I*'*' =■■■'= deitUs 

associated with navatma mantra. 

•jju •' in L.V. ‘^taccakrabhydsjata-vibhutyaSca 

siddha jayante -those become siddhas who acquire supernatural 


Abhinavagupta 


209 


powers by their mastery of sakti-cakra i.e., the wheel or group of 
energies. 

16. Sakini: A.G., in his L.V. says Sdkmindm iaktindm khecaiyd^ 
dibhedabhinndndinL\ i.e. they are saktis different from khecari etc. 
Laksmirama, in his Vivrti says that they are a group of yoginis, 
Svami Lakshmanjee thinks that they are a group of yoginis. They 
seem to be kimlcyoginis who have acquired supernatural powers. 

17. ^Samayam datvd^-- Monier Williams in his Sanskrit-English 
Dictionary says that ^samayam dd^ means ‘‘to propose an agree¬ 
ment”, and ^^samayam kf^ means “to make an agreement or 
engagement”. The expression has been used here in the sense 
of “having made an engagement or appointment.” 

18. These bonds are dnava^ mdyiya and kdrma malas. 

19. The three recommended to be worsliipped are the para 
(supreme), pardparcc (supreme-cum-non-supreme) and apard 
(non-suprcme) Saktis, The transcendental or pardtitd devi is in the 
centre. 

pard 



apard pardpard 

20. In the tradition of the deities, there is no physical contact 
with any female. Those aspirants who have attained to this 
level feel the influx of an internal delight owing to the awakening 
of the kundalini, Ksobhdtmaka visarga refers to the process of the 
flow oi § ah da (sound), sparsa (contact), rupa (form and colour), 
rasa (flavour), and gandha (smell) that well up out of sheer delight. 

This union is jndnamiidrd, an internal spiritual union, not 
kriyamudrd^ not an actual intercourse. 

21. Only those men and women were entitled to be designated 
vlra and yoginl who had attained khecari sdmya. They could have 
the union kriydmudrd (actual intercourse). They develop such 
capacity as enables them to enter §dkta stage suddenly without 



210 


Pard’ Trisikd- Vivarana 


ejaculation on the occasion of orgasm. They have intercourse not 
for momentary sexual pleasure but for the transformation of 
consciousness by an inward ^dkta delight. 

22. In the four kinds of intercourse described, there is the 
pervasion of para aspect of Sakti in the first, of pardpard in the 
second and third and of apard in the fourth. 

In the first three, there is the contact of kunda-golaka and in 
the fourth, there is the contact of ^sukra-§onita! in the intercourse. 

The intercourse of the ^viras^ and ^yoginls" is called technically 
the ^ddi-ydgea which literally means the ‘primal sacrifice’. 

23. Smardnanda--th.^ bliss of sexual union by recollection. There 
is no actual intercourse here. It is only ‘inverted kdma^ or sexual 
delight. 

24. This book is not available now. 

25. Trikona is a technical word. It symbohzes both ^iY 2 L-trikona 
in ^Nhidcijfidnasakti or the male sexual organ is predominant and 
Sakti-/nA:owa in which kriyd-sakti or the female sexual organ is 
predominant. The trikona referred to in Trikatantrasara is Sakti- 
trikona, 

26. Separately, they are known as simply trikona-mudrd or as 
^iw^^trikona or trikona. Jointly, the two triangles are known 
as sat-kona-mudrd. 

Text 

^^OTCi evametat caturdasasuyutam on p. 79,1. 9 upto etadbhairavdtma 
hrdayam on p. 82, 1. 20. 


Translation 

Explanation of the terms caturdaiayutam, tithisdntasamanvitam, trtiya- 
brahma^ and hrdayarn 

(Now A.G. is giving an explanation of the text from verse 9 on- 
wards). 

1st interpretation : 

This i.e., the third brahma, viz. "hrdaya-sf (or amrta-bija) joined 
with the fourteenth vowel i.e., 'au\ is linked with the sixteenth 
i.e., visarga, "ah\ which occurs at the end of tithi^a, the soul of 
fifteen kalds, (Thus it becomes ^sa-\-au-\-a}f — sauh,) 

Tutarn may be interpreted as ^yugmanrC or a pair. With the 


Abhinavagupta 


211 


fourteenth, the pair makes sixteenth which is the ^isa or the 
presiding deity of the fifteen vowels, viz. visarga {ah). 

Its (i.e. of the visarga) end is the seventeenth, viz., the anu~ 
ttara or the transcendental asoect (of Reality). Hrdaya or heart 
is that which is linked with it (i.e. with anuttara). It has aheady 
been stated in detail that all things whether external such as ajai, 
or internal, such as pleasure, take hold of that germ (the soui ce of 
all existence) as the highest Reality. Therefore that {anuttara) is 
the heart or core (of Reality). 

2nd interpretation 

(A.G. gives this interpretation by splitting catiirdaJa into catur 
(four) and (states). ) Tliis is an interpretation with reference 
to the phoneme ‘a’. That which is brahma^ i.e., sdniarasya or equi¬ 
poise, in other words, which is the conjunction of the four states 
{caturda^a) i.e., "udyoga\ ‘avabhdsa\ 'carvano' and 'vildpana! of the 
subject and the object is the primal undifferentiated state. Being 
linked with that means ‘inseparable from that’. 

The vowels which are up to the end ofare known as tit lUa^ 
because out of them, the other remaining phonemes are born. 
The last ones of the vowels coming at the end of the above tit i a 
vowels are the four immortal phonemes viz., r, f, /, h Brahma 
well connected with these vowels. From the point of view o 
ascent, Siva who is higher than nara and Sakti is the thii d. T ere 
fore, the third brahma is identical with supreme Siva. 

The subject {vedaka), moving forward by means of the ou 
states of udyoga^ avabhdsana^ carvana and vildpana^ with his ea^^ern 
increased by those states, dissolving the amrtakalds (i.e. 
within his Self, unifies the entire objectivity with his Self. us, 
by accomplishing the fusion of the stir of the state of the su ject 
and object within the Self, he enters the state anuttara, t e ve y 
heart of the universe which can be accessible only Xojndna 
characterized by identity, ov yoga characterized by activity, 
has been said in Bhagavadgita: “One who is established myo^ 
regards everything as the same (divine) in all cases. He sees t 
Self (in all beings®) and all beings in the Self (VI, 30). 

3td interpretation: (from the point of view of dnanda i.e., with re 
ference to the phoneme ‘fl’.) 

It is dnandasakti (the power of beatitude) which is the base of 


212 


Para-Triiika- Vivarana 


the rise of pure’ iccha^akti (will), i.e. pure icchaiakti is implicit 
in ananda. In a reverse order, iccha is the third with reference to 
kriya kakli (e.g. kriya, 2. jnana, 3. iccha). This iccha (will) in its 
mitial aspect, being untainted tvith desired objects is brahman 
{tadeva prak-kofau-isyamanadi-akalusam brahma). 

_ Caturdaia may be interpreted as forty by analyzing the word 
into Caturye daia i.e., four times ten. Bhairava together with his 
three iaktis (viz. para or supreme, pardpara or supreme-cum-non- 
supreme and apard or non-supreme) plus the thirty-six categories 
{tattvam) would make forty. As has been (rightly) said, “The 
thirty-six Mtvas are to be purifed. The purifier is the supreme 
Bhairava. The means (of purification) is the supreme triad (viz. 
par(^ parapard, apard). This initiation is the highest one”. 

CaturdaSa yutam' means ‘connected with these forty.’ Ananda 
Sakh IS already supreme and being perfect, united with all the 
vowels and their subsequent phonemes i.e., the consonants which 
dicate earth etc. [tadantaih-yonirupadharddibhih samanvitam). 

bt„ 

This is ap- 

of vowet aX " ^^^'^rd-vibhdtani) everywhere (in the form 
ol vowels and consonants and subjects and objects) and is rcah- 

ItTould H 'X"" mukhyatah). 

suite eX " -1^-’ P-ified by the 

yoga is useless ’like reahzation, the practice of 

4th inf f, t ■ illusion {vTthaindrajdlika-kaland-sadrSo) 

ferencItirpLtreto'^^^^ 

icchd (aspect T^tW 

it is br"Zn, beTatse bX’^X’ -"^ext, 

it is fully grown and is'^fh objects of desire, 

abhinnenapurnam brahma). brahma {brmhitam isyamdnena 

are united."The wrd T 

taken in the sense nf ‘ oming after caturdaia can also be 

samanvitam may be interpreted a' 


Abhinavagupta 


213 


lord of vowels, i.e. anuttara or ‘fl*. Tithiidnta means ‘at the end 
of ‘fl’ or ‘a’ of ananda iaktV. ^SamanvitarrC may be analysed into 
sam’\-anu-\-itam, ^Anu" means ‘after* {paicat). ^SarrC means well 
[sarpyak)^ HtarrC means ‘known*. So ^samarwitarrC means well 
known after ananda. (Siva is well known after ananda as icchd. 
That is the hfdaya or core of Bhairava). This icchatmaka brahma is 
bodhamaya i.e. pure consciousness. 

5th interpretation', (from the point of view of iidna^ i.e. with re¬ 
ference to the phoneme ‘i*.) 

Now the interpretation is being given with reference to Udna^ 
i.e. the phoneme ‘i* {iidndpeksqyd). JmAma* may be inter¬ 

preted thus: The third i.e., icchd is brahma. This means that 
owing to expansion {prasdra-vaidt)y it has become great {brhat 5- 
tdm which is the etymological meaning of brahma) i.e., it has 
acquired Udnatd or rulership {iidnatdm dpannarn). Caturdaiayutarn 
means ‘in which the forty tattvas or categories have mingled wi 

one another*. 

Tithiia may be interpreted as follows: Of akula or anuttara w o 
is the lord of the vowels {tithiivarasya akulamaya anuttarntmanafy). 
Antab means sarfikftih i.e., absorption i.e., absorption in anuttara^ 
i.e. the initial pulsation oi kulaiakti that is absorbed in akula or 
anuttara. So tithiidntasamanvitam means ‘joined with the 
pulsation of kulaiakti that is absorbed in akula the lor o e 
vowels.* (That is the hrdaya or core of Bhairava). 

6th interpretation : (from the point of view of unmesa or the phoneme 

V.) . 

Now the interpretation is given from the point of view o 
mesa or jndna-^akti (the energy of knowledge). 

The third brahma is Udna or ruler. 

When the forty categories are just separating from 
when there is the first pulsation for an external ma^ es ^ ^ 

then that state is known as caturdaiayutarp, {yutarn i 

tion in this context). Tithiidntena means with the ^ 
sation. The whole thing means with the desire to s oo o 
{praruruk^tayd); it is well linked with the initia pu 
kula§akti that is absorbed in akula^ ‘the lord of the vowe 
wor.d ‘jam* in ^sarnanvitarrC connotes ^bhararia or maintenance, 
i.e. nourishing the state of objectivity. 



214 


Pard-TriSikd- Vivarana 


1th interpretation: (from the point of view of tmatd i.e., from the 
point of view of the phoneme ‘w’.) 

Onata i.^., u is the intermediate point between jhdncdakti and 
knyasakti. This has been indicated before. Its nature is uihatd, 
i.e. to hold the division of the categories of existence prior to 
manifestation injndna^akti itself. In accordance with this estab- 

the third brahma at this stage is that 
which holds the entire mobile and immobile manifestation within. 
In contrast to the asuddha srsii (the entirely differentiated order of 
manifestation), and suddhaSuddha srsti (the differentiated-cum- 
of existence), it is a purely undifferentiated 
Hence it is the third 

brahma. Phonematically, it is joined with the tithiSas which are 

^eXir-tV^l vowels and with the consonants, 

coming after .hevoweft 

8th interpretations 

The interpretations are given with reference to the four void 

tation is hpJnn- • f- tirst of all the interpre- 

riTy a«?ferT Tlia. is .he void or 

(dSoffefo ' r) ‘r '=>' 'I'C condition 

disappears in the “c), viz. the earth, water, fire and air either 

world-process or in )he suMe fo ” "‘‘“''awal of the 

(0 inhering"„ r ()+ 1 "7'““ The 

hahm. Linked 

may be termed iZl- *at void ether, the third 

tithUvara, i.e. the sun • M *''' “•coal glow of 

or knowledge So ‘’‘^^’'aitio'tio 

<r>orgiow^fp„4;orcxc.’‘ 

m inUrprMio.: (with reference to the phoneme ,.) 

tion ritmabme accordance with the explana- 

with mna, the iymSron .e^n''^'onnecdon 

This also is to be Serp° md ' ,‘1 
with the glow o!praJ,a or knlLdgc"'™” 


Abhinavagupta 


215 


10th interpretation : (with reference to the phoneme /.) 

The third brahma is known as icchd inasmuch as i inheres in / 
(/+f==/). It is vyoma or hlnya (ether) which is the inner state 
(antaradasa) of four viz., earth, water, fire and air, is its base 
{adhara). Therefore, it is linked with that. This brahma being 
connected with some reality which follows the tithisdnta i.e. t e 
glow of fire {yahni)^ known as pramdtr-tejas is of the nature o t e 
void {vyomdtma ). 

11th interpretation: (the interpretation with reference to the 
phoneme /) 

As in f phoneme, the third brahma inherent in the phoneme / is 
isdna (/+z = /) itself. This also is connected, on the one hand, 
with the ether, the inner void, the base of the four categoiies of 
earth, water, fire and air {caturda^ayutam) and on the other, 
with something indefinable that follows the pramdtr-tejas {tithi 

sdnta). , 

Only this one plunges with tremendous momentum into the 
fullest form of the void (J)aripurna ^ilnya) which is Bhairava itse . 

What this means is the following: When icchd together wit 
Udna which is its own nature, reaches the vyoma plane (i.e., t e 
plane of the void) of objective experience {vedya), then it reste 
in slight luminosity for a while, suddenly enters the plane o t e 
void {vyomebhumim) which is unbounded {aparyantatdm) , mvari 
ably steady {nUcaldm) almost like wood or stone. About su 
yogis as have entered the state of the void which is like deep s e 
without the awareness of any object whatsoever [apavedya susup y 
it has been said: “Even the sound of a kettle drum or ro 
cymbal cannot awaken him from his state of absorption 


l2th interpretation : (with reference to e .) 

Now in accordance with the process explained before, whe 
six vowels (tz, 5, z, z, w, u) enter another, there ivers y 

forms. Keeping this in view, the nature of the thxvd bmhma 
follows: When icchd (will) together with iJdna (z‘, - 

towards entering anuttara {a, d), then it expeiiences t ^ ^ 

emotional excitement generated by the union o 'ti so or 
icchd-^akti and anuttara, and this is what is said wath regar to t a 
state. 


216 


Para- Triiikd-Vivarana 


Samanya spanda’ is the fourth state of the particular {yi§esa) 
spandas of the qualities of consciousness flowing externally in the 
form of a vowel of slow tempo, predominantly of the nature of 
sattva, or a vowel of middle tempo, predominantly of the nature 
oi rajas, or a vowel of fast tempo, predominantly of the nature of 
tamos. This is indicated by the word catuh (four). That is akula 
when the state oi samanya spanda is present. Iccha with liana (i) 
joined with that akula or in other words anultara is the third 
rahma in this context. This brahma is also joined with a occurring 
a ter the termination of the phoneme ‘a’ i.e., tithisa {tithiiasya 
akdrasya antyena dnandaiaktyatmana anvitarn). 


13th interpretation: (with reference to ai^ 

(In this connexion, A.G, splits bhairavdtmanah into two, viz., 
ohairavdtma and nah .) 

Similarly when that phoneme e enters the highest state, i.e. 

(«, d), then acquiring the long state i.e. 

^ It abides in the perfect form of Bhairava, and is 

our (Saivas ) brahma. 

ai (bijayugmam) by entering 
thn’ Tt various ways^, become ‘dcckdda^lsamar- 

t ‘‘Til H This is supported by such lines 

accomplished with 

appUed toallo°bjecTofdesi!^»'"^^^ 

nielnTtoTrv°"tr'^^^ ^ . i.e. anuttara state is 

eant to give utterance to kdma-tattva (inhering in ui and 

lith interpretation: (with reference to o and au) 

that Is ;d A -;^Planatioa that has been given earlier, viz., 

of forty cateeories a is joined with the distributed form 

helpful here Wh ” 'towels and consonants will be 

rnl ^ eoull r becomes 

and au this k the iVTa T" ^^e context o 

d au, this IS the third brahma, identical with Bhairava. 

Wh interpretation: (With reference to the phoneme or bindu 


Ahhinavagxipta 217 

In accordance with what has been said earlier, brahma joined 
with the distributed form of the forty categories and the gi'oup 
of vowel-consonants, i.e. brahma appearing in the innumerable 
form of the external world is the bindu or dot {anusvdra). It is the 
kfdaya or the very core of Reality, viz., Bhairava in his aspect of 
knowledge. Consequently, this core or bindu is the nature of the 
third brahma. 

16th interpretation', (with reference to the phoneme ah) 

(i) From the point of view of external visarga 

All this multitude of categories darts forth as Bhairava and 
being emitted outside and expanding, it is known as brahma 
inasmuch as it is of the nature of expansion and abides externally. 

(ii) From the point of view of internal visarga 

It is the stage of visarga which is identified with Bhairava, which 
by setting aside all exclusion indicative of difference and having 
acquired ‘the state of everything being all things’ has grown and 
is thus present also as an internal visarga. (Consequently there 
are with reference to visarga two aspects of the third brahma 
external and internal). This has been determined with atten¬ 
tiveness. 

Thus the pervasion of the third brahma of sixteen kinds has 
been described with reference to vowels. Its pervasion with 
reference to each consonant has already been described. 

Now the expressions ^ caturda§ayutamy tithUdnta-samanvitam^ tn^ 
tiyam brahma^ and hrdayam Bhairavdtma^ have to be explained with 
reference to the various stages of life. 

Third brahma with reference to the classification of bodily states 

Caturdalayutami taking the word daia as da^a^ caturdaiayu^m 
means joined with the four states. The four states are (i) ^ ^ 
hood, (2) youth, (3) old age, and (4) taking on another body 
(after death). Being an aggregation of these four 
stayasamdhdramayarri)^ having a gross body composed o t e ve 
gross elements {pancabhautikarn) and inwardly united wit ti^ i 
sdntUy i.e. prana and apdna which are breaths going out (expira 
tion) and coming in (inspiration) respectively {antah tithUdntan 
praveSanirgamdtmand prdndpdna-rupena yutam)^ the puryastaka is 



218 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


also the third brahma. Being pervasive {brhattvdt), it is void, and 
the heart abiding in it is that of Sakti {atra ca hrdqyam saktydtma) 

In fact, It IS ^i\-a.-bija {bija i.e. source of all existence) who is all 
awareness {bodhatmaka) and who in progressive compactness or 
sohdihcation haying adopted (1) physical body, (2) prana, (3) 
puryastaka, (4) sunya or consciousness devoid of any object, and 
Q If fourth state of consciousness or the metaphysical 

e has expanded into five kinds of experients with particular 
mds of vehicles. These are called respectively (1) external self 
a jaZOTa), (2) prana as the self (bhutdimd), (3) the subtle body 
e se which cariies the soul from one state of existence to 
another {dtzvdhikdtmd), (4) the inner self {antardtmd), and (5) 

tne supreme self {paramdtmd). This is the hrdaya (centre) i.e.. 
Bhairava Himself. 


Notes 

powers of Siva are anuttara {a) or cit, dnanda 
neme phoneme d), icchd (represented by the pho- 

andArri-J(represented by the phoneme '«’), 
after ^ Phonemes, ate). Icchd comes 

the sXj^ct^S'l^r vedaka-tdddtmya-thG identity of 

auof 

tedbyatvdir‘,“l‘" "“’.But in thi, aspect, it is not tain- 
ted by any desired object. Hence it is called pure. 

and separation! connotes both mingling 

6 The HifT context it connotes mingling. 

mentioned nowlsThatl^e ea 

aspect where theJ the first 

whereas the icchd m °f the desired object; 

there is a subtle inrVV second aspect where 

7- As soon Tience of the desired object. 

begins to throb^LT"''? ^^‘^^nal expansion 

Butithasnot yererrS^ " essential nature, 

state of kriyd by which it state oO«a«a and reached the 

This is an interLediato staT the external world. 

e of sunydtisunya. This state is called 


Abhinavagupta 


219 


vyomasamadhi by the mystics. R symbolizes the initial stage of this 
samadhi (ecstasy) and / the final. 

The following indicates the four stages of this samadhi: 

T Unsteady vyomasamadhi followed hy pramdna-tejas or glow of 
knowledge. 

f slightly steady vyomasamadhi followed hy pramdiia-tejas, 

I Semi-steady vyomasamddhi followed by pramdtr-tejas or glow of 

thesubject. 

/ Fully steady vyomasamddhi followed by pramdtr’-tejas. 

8. Sdmdnya spanda: This is the universal vimar§a-§akti of the 
Divine, the universal creative pulsation. When it is exteriorized 
and flows in the form of diflTerent objects, when it becomes the 
manifestation of the gunas oiprakrti^ it is known as vihsa spanda. 

9. “Various ways” {vaicitrydnupraveidt) is to be understood 
thus: 

1. ^ = < 2 + 2 , f, i.e. mingling of anuttara^ icchd and Udna 

2. e~d-\-i^ i, i.e. mingling oidnanda, icchd and isdna 

3. ai = a-\-e, i.e. mingUng of anuttara or trikonabija i.e. e 

4. ai~d-\-e^ i.e. mingling of dnanda and trikonabija^ i.e. e 

In Sarada script e is written as IV. Hence it is called trikonabijay 
I.e. a vowel having three angles. ^ 

10. Acchdda-samartha literally means ‘with the virility covered 
i.e. in-operative. It is also called ^aksubhdha-samarthcC^ i.e. with 
inoperative vitality. In the state in which the male principle and 
the female principle or in other words the vowel and the con¬ 
sonant are not in actuafiunion or in the case in which vowel and 
consonant do not mingle with each other, in that there is no 
external manifestation or expression. This state is known as 
dcchdda~sa7nartha^, Kdmatattva so long as it is not manifest, so long 
as it is not operative in kdma-vdky it is not of practical use. 

The mystery of kdma-vdk lies in the actual union of the male 
and the female principle or vowel and consonant. The kdma as 
pect of Siva-Sakti lies in their samghatta or union. 

The vowel is short {hrasva) which symbolizes only Siva 
without the union of Sakti. Hence it is only ^dcchdda-samartha. 

11. Prasava-samartha : Literally, it means capable of begetting 
or procreation. Ai is always long {dirgha)^ hence it is symbolic 


220 


Pa rd- TrUikd- Vivarana 


of the eternal union ot Siva-Sakti^ and therefore, it is prasava- 
samartha. This means that both kdma-tattva and kdina’-vdk or kdma- 
vdni are present in it. The phoneme ai is thus symbolic of com¬ 
plete or entire {paripurna^ Bhairava, for the union of Siva-Sakti 
is whole Bhairava according to Trika. 

12. Kdma-tattva and (kdma)-vdk-tattva\ 

Kdma-tattva refers only to the potency of procreation. Hence 
i- is indicative only o? dccndda-samartha, {Kdma)--vdk~tattva refers 
to the actual manitestation of the potency in creativity. It is 
prasava-samartha. 

Phonetically, a pure vowel ancombined with consonant is re¬ 
presentative only of Siva who is iicchada-samartha, or kama-tattva, 
ut a vowel combined with consonant is representative of the 
union of Siva-Sakti. Hence it symbolizes prasava-samartha or 
vak-tattva. 


In the present context, ^ symbolizes the former and ai symbo¬ 
lizes the latter. 

, P«-Ua?taka is the subtle body composed of the five tanmatras 
(^abda sound, rupa—ioxm. and colour, flavour, sparia— 

ouc 1 , and gandha—smcW) and manas, buddhi and ahamkdra. This 
IS also ativaktka deha. It is called ativahika, because it carries the 
e rom one birth to another. Till death the Self resides in 

fsTsotraAL"'''"^'^ Abhinavagupta, this 

14. Saktyatma and the five kinds of experients-. 
berr!^ Siva-6i;a Itself in its progressive solidification 

Poryastaka-iarira, prdna-Sarlra, 
of st'>^ Sross body). Since they are all expressions 

of self according to Abhinavagupta, a kind 

subtle body tharSrries thi s^if ^^^^-bhutatmd, (3) the 

another -U-) Self from one form of existence to 

supremeTT^^^^^^^^ Self-a.fara^iaa, (5) the 

supreme Self-z-aramaliaa. All this is brahma. 




Jvom pravesopdyo'tra on p. 82, 1.20 upto bhdvand samvedana 

yuktyamyamaeva on p.QQ,\.2Z. 


Abhinavagupta 

The means for entry into this brahma 


221 


Translation 

The means of entering this (which is the heart of Bhairava) is 
the following: One should constantly contemplate the various 
stages of the experients as integrally Bhairava. What this means 
is the following: 

^Caturda^a-catpdrirnsat-yutam-dvigunam-a^itih^ means ten {daia) multi 
plied by io\xv = catvdrimiat i.c. forty. Catvdrimsat’yuta forty twice 

U. ' 80 

Tithayah pahcadaia means the lunar fortnight i.e. 

Isah i.e, Rudrah ^ ^ 

Antah samanvitayuktd dvigunitd kdldstrayah means double ^ 

the three times (present, past, future)... 

112 


The word ^marmcC in this context means ‘measure of fingers . 
Therefore, dvada^ottaraiatamarmagatcL means ‘stretching up to 
the dimension of 112 fingers.’ 

The whole sentence means: ‘One should (constantly) con 
template on the very corporeal existence {sarirasattdm eva) ii^cg 
rally {anavacchedena) of all the stages of experients sUetc mg 
upto the dimension of 112 fingers,^ viz., sthula iarira, t e 

body, suksma^arira, the subtl^hody, para larira, the causal bo y, 

^dkta ^arira, and spanda iarira^ throbbing with the expansion o^ 

the energy of I-sense {Tnantra^virya’-vikdsa^sphuriKrta)^ u o 

excitement brought about by visarga-viUesa i.e. the . 

the semen of the male state and visarga-sarnghafta i.e. t e 
of the union of the emission or the female state as 
himself. ^ 

In accordance with the tradition of simultaneous enti 
carydkrama, caturda^ayutam is to be explained as fo ^ 

Catasro da^ayasya {tat caturda^ayutam) i.e., that w ic 
aspects, viz. sweet, astringent, bitter and sour i.e., vario 

of wine such as madya^ surd^ dsava etc. 

Tithiidnta in this context means the substance that issues o 
from both, viz. vira^ ^r\d yogini or kunda-golaka. 




222 

P ard~ TrUikd- Vivarana 
SamanvitamT^^ns the secretion existing within their generative 

mSm th'''^ ^Trtiyam brahma' 

means the a^hes that remain after the fuel in the form of the world 

Lan7f d H ^'-^-eness). Bkairavatma 

means fuU and satiating hquid. ‘Rfdayam' or heart signifies the 

in af^? r substances (w4 etc.) 

The fX •' destroy all taint of difference. 

The following process is generally observed. Doubt which brings 
about narrowness of mind is generative of the first spXt S the 

bri^sXurX'^ becomes mature, and finally 

brings about the very fruit (i.e., complete involvement) of mun 

awakened n? T stationary in the case of the un- 

rgetH^^reSTn th" ^^ once a doubt is entertained, 

--s for them: 

<liSS^fXr diverse imagination doubts assume 

They vary accordin^L as adkarma (unrighteous) etc. 

has Ln said i ^^h scripture, and each country. As 

the house, even 1 de ^ away the valuables of 

(Sp. K. ni, 8) P''0®^^°u saps away the vitality of the body.” 

tro^iro^the mycL^oX^ 

out {nirasta-bajava v f "^^^^ons of the aspirant is cast 

Bhairava. TherefoX enters the heart of 

discipline thXerH /''u f P^^otise the 

bfthe teaching of TilaL^g^ eart of Bhairava. This is the sense 
sikha: “One fhouSt T ^een said in Bharga- 

should pracfee i, "f 

said: In Sarvacara also, it has been 

thence arise birth andXth *^Vn owing to ignorance, and 
phonemes, and all thp r. 1 , mantras are of the nature of 

that is considted as d TX "" 

simply water - aU that “O'^-drinkable is (after aU) 

ther beautifu rtlT 'Vho- 

lul or ugly, everything is (after all) the product of 


Abhinavagupta 


223 


the element fire. Touchable and untouchable are considered to 
be only a matter of the element air. The hole (whether of the 
male organ or the female organ) is only a matter of space. 

Sweets offered (to the deity), the person who offers, and one 
who accepts the offer they are all, O goddess, a mass of the five 
elements. There is nothing which is not a product of the five 
elements. For what is one to entertain a desire (as desirable)? 
And regarding what one is to hesitate as undesirable? 

In ViravaU Sastra also, this is the opinion. 

In Kramastotra also, it has been said: 

*'I bow to Kali who, for regulating the affairs of the world 
{jagato yamdya) portrays the form of those who carry out the 
option of doing this or that {yamasyayantuh)^ the option charac¬ 
terized by intentness in accepting one object by keeping off 
other ones {sarvdrthasamkarsana samyamasya)y and to Kali who 
simultaneously assimilates (lit. swallows up) in her inner being 
the advanced souls above vikalpas and enjoys the grand play of 
involving limited experients in vikalpas {mahdgrdsavildsa-rdgdt) 
i.e., who carries out safikoca and vikdsa at the same tune. 

This has been explained by me in detail in the gloss on it, viz. 
Kramakeli. Therefore, in Trika Sastra, this very activity almost 
without any curb is worship. All things are available for t e 
fulfilment of this worship. The course of knowledge has been 
described in detail. Of the castes—Brahmanas, etc., there is no 
fixed principle, for the caste distinction is artificial. The speci 
fication that Brahmanas alone are entitled for instruction c^ 
convince only the silly herd. This has been conclusively clan 
in detail by the Lord in ‘Mukutasamhita*. In Trika, it is esta 
blished without any effort at proving. 

(Now another interpretation of the text is taken up) 


The treatment of. amrtabija 

The fourteenth vowel, i.e. the middle one between o * 

au. TithUdnta i.e., the final of the vowels is visarga i.e. afy> T V ^ 
brahma is that which comes in between ‘m’ \ 

This is really the mantra (i.e. sauh) which is the generating seea 
of the universe. Whatever existent {sat) represented V ^ ^ ^ 
appears whether in the sphere of earth, prakfti or may ^ ^ 
falling within icchdy jndna or kriyd is a triad (represented by au) an 


224 


Para- PrUikd- Vivarana 


being an epitome of all, is delivered in and by Siva (represented 
by the a^).3 Thus this indeterminate {nirvikalpaka) conti- 

nuum of manifestation goes on ceaselessly. 

A deterxmnate thought-construct is used when it is meant to 
express predominantly a sense of difference, connected as it may 
be with the three series of time, as for instance, ‘this was done in 
sue a manner by women, friend, etc., this is being done in such 
a manuCT (by them), this will be done in such a manner (by 
them). On the contrary, even the stage of Siva which is plain 
liberation (and amrtabija) is for the unfortunate ones always 
li.e., in both nirvikalpa and savikalpa states) a desert or a vast 
orest owing to the fear of transmigratory state. “ (For the un- 
or unate ones) there appears to be a heap of tangled flames in 
the form of submarine fire bursting forth from water. From the 
snlitdnff” f ^bode of nectar-like light, there appears to be 

ther^k f r Through thought-construct, 

ofTr of fansmigratory existence even from the expansion 

What strange things extend indiff- 

ys through the development of evil fate !” 

tharalUhk^r*^^^^-^^^ “ffo who knows 

Self) wh ^ ™^oifestation) is mine (i.e. belongs to the 

malllata ^ possesses 

have their nla ‘^^ohotomising thought-constructs 

'2)- As among figures, 
liquors sura * 7^ three-eyed Siva etc., among spirituous 

sta^^^ leads to the 

tud? cal\Tnrr"l°^'^’^''^ ambrosia of the highest beati- 

forth in mafofe t phonemes within itself, shines 

(truth), That which is the highest nature oisatja 

all beginning vdtS”^'" ’ (acquisition), sattd (existence), 
of the sound ‘ti’ t ’^^^^^onenced at the time of the appearance 
the quivering of the pleasurable sensation when there is 

of the femnlf- ^ ^ organ and contraction-cum-expansion 
satya etc. °'^San. That is really the non-mayiya nature of 

amrtabhP 'ha^ 7 °f of the supreme core i.e., 

amrtabtja, have become versed in knowing a thing by a mere hint 


Abhinavagupta 


225 


or gesture can, by penetration into truth througn sa {tdvati 
satyapade aniipravesdt) y know the desired object of others only by 
means of the phoneme etc., out of the innumerable words 
such as ^gagand* y ^gavayci and ^gavd y occurring initially, in the 
middle or at the end. Thus even one phoneme can express the 
real sense. As has been said “There is an intermixture of word, 
the object denoted and the knowledge (indicated by the word) 
by mutual imposition. If one practises samyamd on each ot them 
separately, he can acquire the kno\vledge of the sound of all 
creatures.” (Yogasutra III, 17)* 

Therefore, for the most part even phonemes a , ca which 
are mere ‘particles’ and aflixes etc., even in the state of mdyd 
(i.e. even in the work-a-day world), as in the highest state ex¬ 
press such a sense of negation and totality {jiisedhasamuccayddika’^ 
martharn abhidadhati) as are absorbed in the state of the subject and 
have not yet acquired objectivity and being destitute of external 
gender and number have not yet acquired the status oi^sattva or a 
definite word of declension and are non-different from things that 
are yet to become the objects of negation and totality. This is the 
sense also of what respected Bhartrhari says in the following lines 
in Vakyavicara i.e. Vakyapadiya: 

“Every word is initially complete in itself separately but (in a 
reciprocal relation of word, sense and knowledge) that same word 
becomes a correlative”. 

In Vedic grammar and divine Sastras like Siva-Sutras, an 
etymological explanation of words occurring as mantra (sacied 
formula) or in initiation, m accordance with the intent of each 
letter of the word is considered to be perfectly appropriate. That 
is not conventional; the etymological explanation of every word, 
owing to unforeseen destiny has not reached the common people. 
So the nature of the phoneme ^sa^ is also like this. The explanation 
of au and the visarga (of the mantra sauh) has already been given. 
It has been said in Purva-Sastra (Malinivijaya): 

“Three spheres (viz. prthiviy prakni and mdyd) are pervaded by 
the phoneme ^sd y the fourth one (viz. the Sakti sphere) is per¬ 
vaded by the trident i.e. ^aiC and the one that transcends all, 
viz. Siva is indicated by This is how the pervasion 

oipard is described.” (M.V. IV, v. 25). 

‘‘The mystery of this can be understood only when the spiritual 


220 

Para- TrUikd-Vivarana 

director is satisfied with the physique, monetary position, 

ow edge of the Sastras, good caste, good morals and good 
quahties of the pupil. O goddess, venerated by the viras it is only 
When the mystery (of this mantra) is unravelled {hhedita) by the 
pleased in heart, it is only then that it should be considered 

iteration), not otherwise.” 
^^^.’57-58.) Elsewhere also it has been said: 

vi. /-A (i-e. amrtabija or sauh), one mudra 

z. khecart. One in whom both of these are engendered is situated 
m a stage of surpassing peace.” 

the rule is that mystic knowledge or this mantra is 
j^-]. . .? e (clearly) in a book. In Purva-Sastra (i.e. 

the described in a disguised way in 

ctmtaZdT “Unhed with the left thigh, thecreatureL 
/ - ^t’adition” in which‘united with the left thieh’ 

paryalramalatakT^ '^n ’ ^‘^''otding to tradition’ {pSram- 

really means f whole thing 

said “As Ivintr P' hook also, it will be 

y g m the seed of a banyan tree”. 

Explanation of etannah.. .yogavimuktidam 

Sr r*' “> *' «-• 

yoginl. The person h ° f t;ira, and ah, symbol of visarga-sakti 
yogini-jata']. Only such^aoeP of these is known as 

of Bhairava i.e. lirta^i ^ reahzation of the heart 

1 «* mantra sauh in whom: 

otMmm) and 

keep off or destrov'^the^^'^'d 'eho can successfully 

He alone can cSy ?iS‘ " ’•“= ““ 

yogini cannot realize it Th v Rudra, nor born of 

sadyoga or identity with Bhairlta ^mtablja can bestow 

y Bhairava, which is ascertained as hbera- 

yopntbhuh. ^ ^^nown as yogmlbhuh. Abhinavagupta hinoself was a 



Ahhinavagupta 


227 


tion (in Trika). The word ^sadyaK denotes immediately. This 
suggests that he who realizes it is of this kind i.e., Rudra or born 
oiyogini\ no one else can obtain it. He who is of the above kind 
realizes it clearly. Thus he realizes the heart i.e., ^sauK which 
offers liberation immediately. 

Explanation of^asya uccdra krte,, ,suadehdueialaksanam^ 

Mantras are the sacred phonemes both worldly and divine. 
They save by reflection {mananatrdnarupdh). For worldly purposes, 
they are of the form of thought-construct i.e., vikalpa\ as divine or 
transcendental, they are full of samvit-iakti (the power of higher 
consciousness). The mudrds are the particular dispositions of the 
hands and feet of the nature of kriydiakti. Mantramudragana^ there¬ 
fore, means a host of great powers brought into being by mantra 
and mudrd^ which in the collective form is identical With,pardiakti 
(the supreme Sakti). * 

[A.G. explains svadehdveialaksanam in the following ways: ] 

(1) ^Sva^ means ‘of one’s own’ {svasya-dtmanah) dehasya —of the 
body means ^of prdna, puryasfaka, §unya etc.’ Ave§ah means imme¬ 
diately by the entrance (in oneself) of the highest nature, there 
IS the disappearance of the stupefaction which connotes depen¬ 
dence on others and the emergence of the stage of the conscious 
subject permeated by autonomy. (2) svadehdve§ah may be ana¬ 
lysed into svadd-\-i7id-\-dve§ah. ^Svadff means ‘that which imparts 
its own nature (of prakd^a and vimar^a) to all objects’. Ihd means 
expansion of intial icchd up to kriyd. Tayd dve§ah means penetra¬ 
tion by such ihd. So the whole phrase {svadehdve§alaksanarn) means 
in a manner characterized by the penetration in him of the ex¬ 
pansion of ihd which has the divine nature of prakd§a and vimaria. 
The supreme state of the Experient characterized by such ihd is 
svadehdve§ah. That is the (real) enunciation of this mantra i.e. 
sauh which arises in the above manner, being established in the 
highest aspect i.e., the aspect of the supreme conscious Self {urdh^ 
vdcarane sthitau satydm). 

*In the ordinary life, a senseis meant for a specific purpose. The eye for 
instance can only see, not hear. There is, however, a general state of the sense- 
activities in which the functions of all the senses can be performed simultane¬ 
ously without the use of the gross senses. This is the collective state of the 
senses. 



228 


Para- Trisika- Vivarana 


The way by which this slate can be brought about has been 
determined very often. (Now A.G. interprets sadyas tarimiikha- 
tam etc.). By the word ^sadyah" (immediately) is suggested absorp¬ 
tion in the anuttara stage. ^Tanmukhatdm eti' means that after 
samdvesa^ one acquires supreme consciousness [para-rupa^, This 
penetration is not the like that of the animals whose real nature 
of Bhairava on the contrary is concealed. (Now A.G. takes up 
^muhurtam smaratP for explanation). ^MiihuriaiVi in this context 
means Tortyeight minutes’. Though amrtabija is undetermined 
by time {akdlakaliiatvPpi) yet the word ^muhurta' is used here 
with reference to the experience of other experients wliich is 
temporal {para-kalandpeksayd). ^Tah smaratV means he who esta¬ 
blishes congruous connexion with amrtabija {aiiusandhatte), He 
alone holds captive {sambadhnati) i.e. makes identical with him¬ 
self (svdtmani ekikaroti) the multitude of mantra and mudrd already 
explained because of his unity consciousness {advayatah). How 
does he do so? He alone can do it who by means of cumbaka i.e. 
by means of Mkta-^arira which contacts the universal aspect, 
having impressed with mudras on all fronts, establishes congruous 
connexion with amrtabija. 

The particle is used in the sense of certainty. He who 
being stamped with the pulsation of Sakti, has joined his con¬ 
sciousness in congruous unity with Siva who is the embodiment 
of tliis kind of true state i.e., sauh; he alone accomplishes this, not 
stone etc., which come under the category of nara. (The ex¬ 
planation oi atitdndgata...kathayati eva is as follows): 

He tells by mere will {safikalpandt) all the events which have no 
obvious meaning (anartharupam)^ goes on telling all about them 
ti 1 the very end (kathdparyantatdm nayati)^ events of the past (atita)^ 
or likely to occur in the future {andgata) or which may be not 
easting {prdgabhdva), or non-existent in any other form {anydbhd- 
vdt), i.e. in the form oipradhvarnsdbhdva (non-existence caused by 
utter destruction), atyantdbhdva (absolute non-existence), or 
anyonydbhdva (mutual non-existence) or of any other kind of non¬ 
existence {itaradapi). Under what circumstances does he do so? 
The answer is when he is interrogated about a certain matter 
{prstam tadyasydsti sa tathd) —he is all-knowing. Only when a 
question is put {pra§ne)^ then what he desires to know (yadeva 
kila jnipsyati) that which is already lying within him, he expresses 


Abhinavagupta 


229 


outwardly in vaikhari or gross speech {tadeva antargatam bahisku-- 
rule). As has been said: 

“As the sustainer of this universe (i.e. Siva) when eagerly 
entreated with desire accomplishes all the desires abiding in the 
heart of the embodied who is awake after causing the rise of 
the moon {soma) and the sun {surya).^^^ (Sp. K, III, 1) (i.e. by 
means of jndna and kriyds'akti ). One and the same yogi even in 
memory (wliich refers to the past) and imagination (which 
refers to the future) remains equally in the present. Past and 
future do not exist for him. As has been said: 

“It is better to remain in the present which is not limited by 
the past and the future.When the state of the experient has 
been existing from before (from endless time) and there cannot 
be any increase or decrease in it, how can it tolerate such limi¬ 
tations of the present? “So and so knows this, does this^\ There¬ 
fore, it has ^sakrdvibkdtatva\ i.e. it is shining eternally. Therefore 
has it been said. It is because of this i.e. limitation that the pre¬ 
sent time requires a reference to the past etc. i.e., to the past and 
the future. In the absence of limitation, because of non-appli' 
cability of expectancy, reality is undetermined by time. This 
has been repeatedly stated. It is the Lord alone who makes the 
variegated power of time manifest. “Moreover in any waking 
condition, that which is considered to be a ghatikd i.e. twenty 
four minutes, in that very time those experients, who are under¬ 
going varied experiences in a dream, experience the diversity of 
a day, three hours {prahard), a year etc.’\ 

(Now A.G. is giving an interpretation of the fourteenth verse, 
viz, praharddyadabhipretam.,,rudra^aktibhih. The vision of the Deity 
by means of rodhana and drdvana ,) 

Rodhana-praharah =prakrstoharah ; sdksdt = sdksa-{-^d. 

Praharah has been explained by A.G. as the state of complete 
dissolution. The sense is: the aspirants after having realized the 
amrta-bija or sauh, and having assimilated the objective worJd 
grasped through the senses into the Self {sdksdt), or in other 
words achieved its dissolution in akula or anuttara. 

Drdvana-saksa -\-at 

Making the same sense-grasped {sdksa) objective world which 
is now internalized, externalize {at), bringing it face to face with 
jhdnaiakti residing in Sadasiva, the so-called preta {preta-^abda- 


230 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


vdcya-saddiiva-nivista-jndnaiakti-dbhimukhyena ), undoubtedly {asam- 
digdham krtvd), realizes the goddess icchd-iakti —the source of 
effecting all external forms {rupdndm kalanam) and attracted by the 
simultaneous process of rodhana-drdvana-iakti^ i.e. the simultaneous 
Sakti of assimilating inwards the sense-grasped objective world 
{sdksasya-sendriyasya rupasya adanam bhaksanam krtvd) and effecting 
externalization of fthe assimilated objective world {atanam ca 
sdtatyagamanam krtvd)^ (realizes the goddess icchd-§akti), 

Ru denotes rodhana and ^dra^ denotes drdvana. Rodhana in this 
context is a technical term. It means sarnhdra^ i.e. withdrawal or 
dissolution. Drdvana is also a technical term in this context. It 
means srs^i i.e. manifestation. Being drawn i.e. going in a state of 
absorption through the samhdra and srsti §aktis^ he {theyogi) fully 
perceives i.e. experiences. This is what is meant to be said. (First 
of all, there is rodhana —the state of inward dissolution and then 
there is drdvana^ the state of external expansion). 

1. Rodhana the state of inward dissolution 


What is said to be perception or experience {yadidarn dar§anarn 
ndma) th.^X comes to yogi who, having reached the state of 
a u a in which the waves of all the external vikalpas (thought- 
constructs) have dissolved {tat-sarva-tarahga-pratyastamaydrdhya~ 
w a sattddhirudhasya) and full of icchd~§akti which has reached its 
g est capacity by coming in contact with svdtantrya (divine 
au onomy) full of endless glory {ananta-mahima-svdtantrya-yogdt)^ 
reab^es the dissoluUon of iuhi in 

2. Drdvana the state of external expansion. 

Then the same icchd becoming externally oriented assumes the 
spec o jhanaiakti, having slightly indistinct appearances of 
difference as its object. 

Rodhana even in external orientation and Drdvana even in internal orien¬ 
tation 


^ ^ jndnaJakti of the nature of sdmdnya spanda (general pulsa* 

tion) e^^anding towards the outside, assumes the form of the 
senses o t e nature of specific spanda and the yogi at this state 
ac eves the rodhana or arresting of the senses in the same condi¬ 
tion outside. This is indeed atana in rodhana i.e. sdtatydgamana or 
continuous movement in rodhana or arresting. Therefore, rodhana 


Abhinavagupta 231 

is both dravana or expansion and bhaksana (swallowing) or dis¬ 
solution. Tills process is known as vamana-bhaksana^ i.e. both 
ejecting outside and swallowing within. Dariana or experience 
is of the nature of prathd i.e. it involves both sdmdnya or general 
jfidna and viiesa or specific and what is prathd involves diver¬ 

sity of expansion {prathdyd^ca tathavidha’-vaicitrya-yogdt), A state 
of indecision or doubt depends on two alternatives, e.g., whether 
this is the trunk of a tree or a human being. Even this uncertainty 
has an element of certainty about it (for certainly it is one of 
these and cannot be anything else). Thus the divine power 
achieves what is hard to accomplish. 

Explanation of prahara.,,smarana 

Such a yogi is verily Bhairava who has the power of memory 
which is pardpara i.e. which assimilates a past experience to a 
present one. That is why it has been said only in ‘two praharas 
i.e. by placing two cognitions (/?arfland apara) together. para 
or the previous or the prahara is that of actual experience and 
the apara or the second prahara is the cognition of the sameness in 
the present. Remembering the amrtabija in this way (i.e. m 
pardpara"^ way) he becomes settled in vyoma or empty space 
{vyomastho jdyate) i.e. he acquires the status of an experient in 
puryastaka (at the time of perception or first experience) and ^unya 
or void (at the time of apohana). When his perceptual experience 
is characterized by prahara i.e. by complete absorption, he 
deliberates upon it by calling it up in memory again and again. 
^^Sdksdt poiyati asanidigdharn...rudra ^aktibhiK^ is connected wit 
this as with the previous one. It has been said that till that 
even the memory is like the original experience itself. It is sai 
that he is united with the vikalpa iakti of the nature of apara i.e., 
apohana i.e., he experiences even the gap occurring between the 
first experience and its recall. 

(Now A.G. is explaining the 15th and 16th verses). When per¬ 
ceiving, then remembering, then settled in vyoma i.e., in apo aria 

(the experience of the gap between the first experience and its 
recall), he experiences again by means of these processes um- 
tedly {trayena) then with three kinds of cognition characterized 

^Pardpara means that together with dariana or anubhcivajddna, the yogi kas 
smrtijMnat vikalpajMna and apohanajHdna. 



232 


Pard-TrUikd- Vivarana 


by the expression praharatraya^ the mdtarah sarvd i.e., all the inner 
pramdtaras^ in other words the inner supreme energies of the sen¬ 
ses,® being experients become siddha or perfect in experiencing 
the objects regardless of the other experients being successful in 
experiencing them.*^ 

Toge^varyah means those who have gained aUvarya i.e., svdtan- 
trya or autonomy by means oiyoga characterized by identity with 
the inner genuine experient. Mahdbaldh means ^mahat balam 
ydsdm tdlf i.e., they whose prowess is great. The bala or prowess 
here means the power of expanding in all directions without any 
check in contrast to the external senses. ‘They’ refers to the 
inner saktis {antah-karana-didhatayah) viz., manas, buddhi and 
ahainkdra. These are also perfect because regardless of the res- 
traints advocated by all the ordinary empirical texts, they are 
^ activity prompted by the ardour or autonomy. 

rah Vires in this context are what are called the organs of 

sense and the organs of action (of suchj^o^w). They also become 

pel ect. besvarah i.e., the lords of the viras or in other words, 
other phonemes also become perfect. 

Brahmi and other divinities who appear 
phonemes and.who are 
tinn ° denoting different mental modes such as attrac- 

Since . This host of powers also becomes perfect. 

IS perfect, therefore it is powerful (balavan). 

perfectW jacchanti means (they) offer the parama- 

of the means parasyama i.e., pramiti or correct notion 

vikalMttrik-^^ experient (parasya). This siddhi or perfection is 
able^to ninn external means of proof, the vogi is 

^le LIT "T -g-’ --h is the su- 

jogi, viz. thef^'T^ desired object of the 

would be annr^ (real) T’. Two alternative courses 

the jo^iwho caTrii^^tf^''^^^^ {/crama^ak) both to 

without knowing its ful/^ practice as a matter of course 
voei who rarr! ^ {ajndtarthakriye) and also to the 

purport UnmrtlakZy^" 


Explanation of '’anena.. .prasidhyatV 

In short {kirn bahund), those adepts (mantrinak) who practise 


Abhinavagupta 


233 


the discipline of spiritual perfection {sadhayanti) in accordance 
with the mantra of other scriptures, they also will become perfect 
by this creative mantra [hrdayam i.e., sauh hija) and will become 
liberated while alive. Without this {mantra) the highest per¬ 
fection will not be achieved. This is the sense. 

The interpretation of the last lin , viz. ^yat kincit bhairava etc’ 
is the following: ^Siddhah or they who have become perfect 
(through sadhayanti or they who are carrying on the dis¬ 
cipline of spiritual life (through setsyanti or they who will 

become perfect gradually by means of powers like animd etc., all 
these have achieved or will achieve perfection only through this 
mantra (i.e., sauh). Without penetration in this central creative 
mantra, even success in the pragmatic life will not be achieved, 
or in tantra i.e., in the practical discipline of yoga, all that is due 
to this {mantra) only. 

Thus the highest Lord himself is this hrdaya bija i.e., sauh 
mantra. In this way strengthened by the three iaktis (of para, 
pardpard and apard,), he is full of udaya-samhdra-maya'^ apd identi¬ 
cal with infinite Consciousness.® 

(A.G. is now explaining adrstamandaWpi) 

(1) From the standpoint of pati 

Thus, ^adrstd^ is that which is unseen i.e., unknown, the sphere 
of ignorance, the limitation of mdyd {akhydti-rupam andara mdyd'- 
malam). This hrdaya-bija {sauh) realized in this way removes 
{lumpati) the limitation oi mdyd which brings about a sense of 
differentiation and also the primal ignorance {akkydti rupam) of the 
true nature of the Self. 

(2) From the standpoint of pa^u {adrstarn, anddni eva lopah, tadyogi) 

At the same time, this amrta-bija having accepted the limi¬ 
tation {lopa or sankoca) pervading the four spheres of Sakti, mdyd 
etc. is present in the form of limitation also. 

Thus the highest Lord who is a mass of consciousness has vidyd 
(i.e. anubhava or the para state), mdyd (i.e., apohana or the apard 

is a technical term. It means that at the time of ex¬ 
perience, it is wd/fyernana (rising), at the time of memory (smrti), it is udaya^^ 
samhdra~maya^ at the time of apohana, it is only samhdra-inaya. Udaya-samhdra 
includes all the three. 



234 Para-Triiikd- Vivarana 

state) and both (i.e., sinrti or pardpard state). As has been rightly 
said: 

^^Dariana i.e., experience is the supreme Sakti {pard)^ smarana 
or memory is the supreme-cum-non-supreme Sakti {pardpard); 
vikalpa or alternation or apohana is the non-supreme Sakti {apard). 
The Lord has all the three Saktis. He has both the powers of 
mdyd (the powder of differentiation) dindvidyd (the power of non- 
difference or identity). Mdyd has four spheres (viz., prthiviy 
prakrti^ mdyd and iakti). Vidyd is the consciousness of Self, full of 
grace, the beneficent Energy of Siva.” 

If the above verses have to be interpreted primarily in 
accordance with yoga then as prescribed in Sri-purvasastra 
(Malinivijaya) etc., one should first follow holy observance (of 
fasting etc.) and then enunciate this mantra (i.e. sauh ). The verses 
should be interpreted evidently in this way, for in the fixed prac¬ 
tices of {drstakdryesu) the numerous practices depending on 
a fixed order refer only to certain fixed rules. The yogis also 
have to observe a fixed discipline in connexion with nerves, 
vortices of energy {cakra), karanas^, creative contemplation {bkd- 
vand), etc. 


Notes 

1. The throb of the corporeal I-sense will be clear from the 
following chart: 


Dimension The state Name of Dimension Folds of the 



of the 
Experient 

the body 

of the 
fingers 

Body 

From the toe 

Bahyatma 

Sthula- 

84 

The external 

of the foot up 
to the head 

pramata 

sarira 


fold of the 
body 

From the toe 

Bhutatma- 

Suksma- 

12 

The inner 

of the foot up 
to Brahma- 
randhra 

pramata 

sarira 

(84+12) 

96 

= second fold 

From the toe 

Ativahika- 

Para- 

12 

Third fold 

of the foot 

atma- 

sarira (96 + 12) = 

measured up- 

upward up to 

pramata or 


108 

to 12 fingers 



Abhinavagupta 

108 fingers puryastaka 


From the toe of Antaratma- 
the foot down- pramata 
ward in the 
earth upto two 
fingers 

Two fingers Paramatma- 

above the pramata 

Ativahika 


235 

above 

Brahma- 

randhra 

Sakta- 2 Fourth fold 

sarira (108-f-2) = 

110 


Spanda- 2 Fifth 
sarira (110 -\-2) = fold 
112 


2. 'Vira^: This means literally a ‘hero’. The term designates a 
special category of Tantrika initiates characterized by courage 
and an inclination towards orgiastic practices. 

3. This means that the mantra ^sauK covers the entire mani¬ 
festation. 

4. Sarnyama is a technical word of the Yoga-Sutras of PatanjaJi. 
It includes the three practices of dharana or fixing the attention, 
dhyana or meditation and samadhi or complete absorption of the 
mind. 

5. Here soma or the moon symbolizes jndna-iakti (the power of 
knowledge) and surya or sun symbolizes kriydiakti (the power of 
action). 

5. a cf. Malinivijaya Varttika 1,156, with the sukhi bhaoet, 

6. PaTame§a-§akti means the inner supreme energy of the sen¬ 
ses. The word mdtarah connotes these inner ^aktis or energies 
of the senses. There is a diflference between indriya-iakti and 
indriyavTtti, Indriyaiakti means the inner energy of the senses, indri^ 
yavrtti means the mode in which senses perceive objects, /n^n- 
yavftti is extroverted; indriyaiakti is introverted. Indriya§akti has 
abhedajfiana or identity-consciousness; indriyavrtti is concerned with 
bhedajndna^ the difference and variety of objects. 

7. When all perceivers perceive the same object as it is, e.g., 
when all perceive a jar as jar, then the perception is confirmed 
and it is considered to be the right perception. The yogi’s per¬ 
ception is perfect whether other people perceive a particular 
object in the same way or not. Moreover, the perception of other 



236 


Para- TrUikd- Vivarana 


people is of the kind of indriyavrtti^ whereas the perception of the 
yogi is of the kind of indriyaiakti which is of a different order. 

8. Ananta-samvidaikyaialii This includes the ideas of ^prasdra- 
hr day (C and samhdra-hrdaya, Prasdra-hrdaya is a-ha-rrC, This is 
known as ^hrdaya-bijd*. Samhdra-hrdaya is m-ha-a. This is technically 
known as pinda-ndtha. Both refer to the identity of the infinite I- 
consciousness. 

9. Karana is one of the dnava updyas by which the aspirant con¬ 
templates over the body and the nervous system as an epitome 
of the cosmos. 

Introduction to Verse 19 

It has been said that ‘Trika is higher than Kula’. Now of this 
Trika, amttara is that which transcends all. It is this which the 
Tantra is going to describe. 

ADRSTAMANDALO’PI EVAM 

yah kaScid vetti tattvatah 
SA SIDDHIBHAGBHAVEN NITYAM 
SA YOGI SA CA DiKSITAH // 19 / 
Translation 

Whosoever thus knows truly (the bijamantra sauk) even if he 

as no^een the mandala, he enjoys the success of perfection eter- 
na y. He is (perfect) yogi, he is (really) initiated. 


From manialam on p. 90, 1. 7 upto nityamiti on-p. 90,1.19. 

Translation 

i ^eans a mystic circle (diagram) in which the deity 

. . ^ means one who has not seen or one who has 

joine t ^ ^^^oci3Xion oiyoginis {aprdptamelako^pi) hy vci^dins oi 
(of certain religious rites through §akti process 
0 ^a) or ni^dfana i.e., a religious rite practised at night 
process or hathapdka i.e. a persistent process of 
ass ^ ^ itig experience to the consciousness of the experient 
classed under idmbhava process. 

i^other explanation of mandala may be the system of nerves as 
^ c ^ pranic currents and a smaller group of nerves. 

admamandalaV according to this interpretation of mandala 
wou d mean one who has not perceived the group of nerves etc. 

{Continued on page 238) 


Abhinavagupta 


237 


CHART No. 10 



The outline of the Mandala of the Trident and Lotuses 
{tri^uldbjaman^alam) prescribed by MVUT 9.6-31 
(TA31.62-85b). 

Diagram Courtesy: A. Sanderson 





238 


Pard-TrUikd’-Vwarana 


by means of yogic practice’, it may be interpreted as not even 
having seen the diagram of the trident with lotuses.^ In the 
matter of realization, mandala or the ceremony of initiation is 
of no use. 

^Evam means ^evamevcH i.e. all of a sudden. 

^Tah kascif means: he who has been favoured with the highest 
grace {pardJaktipdtdnugrhito)^ ^vettV means he alone knows. ‘This 
realization alone is diksd^ what else is diksd (initiation)?’ 

Therefore thus knowing, he has (really) been initiated by 
onmipresent revered Bhairava. The statement that “The man 
with little intelligence who adopts a mantra by himself (without 
the help of a^z/rw) gets into trouble”^ applies only to mantras other 
than this central seminal mantra^ not to this mantra^ viz., sank bija^ 
for it is the very heart of Bhairava. This mantra transcends even 
such deities as Mantra, Mantresvara and Mantramahesvara. 

This cannot be expressed in a book. It is the very core of the 
Divine. It has (already) been clearly laid down that this is truly 
acquired only by the favour of the highest grace. So ‘any one’ 
su.ggests that any one can acquire it irrespective of caste, religious 
vow, caryd etc.; insight into it is the main point. 

That enjoys full perfection. Since 3.yogi is one who yearns 
a.ter conununion with the Divine, initiation characterized by the 
^ t^of spiritual insight {jfidna-ddna) and the destruction of mdyd 
^dydksapa^a)^ is imparted to him alone. The particle has 
een used in the sense of certainty. Therefore he should be wholly 
cmsi ered 3, yogi. That is why it is said, “He alone is yogi 
^vho has attained full perfection. He alone is ever initiated.” 


Notes 


1. Mandala: A.G. interprets it in three ways: 

( ) devatacakram, a circle in which a deity is installed. This is 
nac tneaning of the word, (2) the group of nerves for the 
STtuses^'^'"'' diagram of the trident 


2. triJulabjadimanMarn: This is the diagram of a triangle re- 
presenting the divine Sakti or Devi in all her aspects. A white 

each prong of the in'Ma for worship, 
e diagram IS given on the previons page. 

On the occasion of initiation, a diagram like this was drawn with 


Ahhinavagupta 239 

lines of lime and shown to the disciple before initiation. 

3. The full verse referred to is as follows: 

Svayamgyhita mantra^ca kli^yante calpabuddhayah 
Lipisthitastu yo mantro nirviryali so’trakalpitah // 

“People with little intelligence who adopt a mantra by them¬ 
selves (without its being imparted by a guru) get into trouble. 
That mantra which is simply recorded in a book is without any 
power. This is what is declared here.*’ 

4. This is hermeneutic interpretation of diksd. The letter 
means ^diyate jfidnam^ i.e. insight is imparted; the letter ^ksa^ 
means ^k$iyate pdparrC i.e., sin is destroyed. 

Text of the Verse 

ANENA jR ATAMATRENA JRAYATE SARVASAKTIBHIH 

Translation 

By mere knowledge of this mantra he (being perfect) is known 
by all the ^aktis. 

Translation of the Commentary (p. 90, 1. 22 to I. 24) 

He is known by all the iaktis means ‘by all the omniscient 
deities*. By mere knowledge of this mantra^ he knows whatever 
is known by those iaktis. This should be interpreted as before; 
^Sarvdbhih iaktibhih^ is used in an instrumental sense* 

Text xjf the Verse 

SAkinikulasAmAnyo 

BRAVED YOGAM VINAPI HI //20// 
Translation 

Even without he becomes equal to the family of Sakinis. 

Translation of the Commentary (p. 91, I. 4 to 1. 6) 

Merely by having an insight in this mantrap without the 
practice oiyoga which brings about identity with the Divine after 
the end of this body formed by mayd^ the aspirant not only be- 



240 


Para- Trisikd- Vivarana 


comes equal to the family of Sakinis—but becomes even superior 
to them, for the group of Sakini has only viiesa spanda (particular 
spanda) (which only leads to behaviour and intercourse charac¬ 
terised by differentiation), whereas he (the aspirant) becomes 
identified with sdmdnya spanda or universal pulsation of the Divine, 
with the energy of the unsurpassed akula {sdmdnya spandarupo 
akularupah) and becomes the master of the group o^saktis. 

Notes 

1. Anena jndtamdtrena (by merely having an insight in this 
mantra)\ In L.V. A.G. explains it thus: Etatsamdve§dbhydsdt i.e., 
by the practice of absorption in this (i.e. sauh). 

2. Sdkinikulasdmdnyo'. In L.V., A.G. explains it thus: Sdkini- 
kulena devatacakrena sdmdnyastulyo bhavati^ atienajndtamdtrena sarvasya- 
vastunah purandt^ i.e. He becomes equal to the group of divinities, 
for merely by the knowledge of this {mantra), there is the pleni¬ 
tude of all things. 

In his Vivarana commentary on Paratrisika, A.G. says that the 
aspirant who has acquired a knowledge of the mantra sauh not 
only becomes equal to the Sakinis but even rises superior to them, 
for the Sakinis are confined only to visesa spanda, whereas this 
aspirant acquires the energy of sdmdnya or universal spanda. 

Text of the Verse 

avidhijno vidhanajno 

JAYATE YAJANAM PRATI // 21 // 

Translation 

Even if he is ignorant of the injunctions pertaining to rituals, 
e acquires the knowledge of the injunctions concerning sacrifice 
(by himself). ^ 

Translation OF the Commentary (p. 91, 1. 10 to 1. 15) 

means both knowledge (Jndnam) (of the injunctions per- 
taimng to religious ceremonies) and its practical application 
{kriyd). He who has not got these two is a mere animal. As has 
been said in Kiranagama: “He who is engaged only in thinking 
of the means of (sensuous) enjoyment {bhogopdyavicintakah) is always 


Abhinavagupta 

a mere formless animal, ignorant, incapable of doing anything, 
having no qualities, wanting in power, diffusive {vyo.pi)^ con¬ 
fined only within mayd^ and steeped in her interior.” 

Even such an animal by mere insight into this mantra becomes 
a vidh&najna of sacrifice. ^Vidhanajna^ is one who has both know¬ 
ledge of the injunctions and their practical application {vidhdnaT[t 
jhacayasya sah) i.e., he is both a knower and performer of the 
ceremony appropriate to a certain religious obligation {pisaya^ 
sarjfigata karanamprati kart&jndtd ca). 

Though the sacrifice that he performs may not be formally 
perfect, yet it brings about the full fruit for him, for this central 
seminal mantra is albinclusive. 

Text of the Verse 

KALAGNIM Aditah KRTVA 

MAyANTAM brahmadehagam 
Sivo viSvAdyanantAntah 

PARAM SAKTITRAYAM MAT AM // 22 // 

Translation 

Beginning from kdldgni i.e., the earth right up to mdyd^ thirtyone 
tattvas rest in AmAma-body. Siva i.e. andirita Siva with ^ 
rests in an^-^anta-\-antah i.e.,in visarga (coming) at the ^ * 

i.e. ah. In the remaining {para)^ i.e., au beginning from u ^ a 
vidyd {viivddi)^ rests Sakti, iakti^trayau^.^ ^o,kti~triiula Sa 
Isvara and Suddhavidya of the mXvsc oi icchdy jndnd and nya. 
This Sakti-^nifi/a is acknowledged as the Supreme ^acca param 
matam) or Creative force (pisargamaya). 

Translation of the Commentary (p. 91,1. 21 to p. 92,1. 2) 

Kdldgni is the initial bkuvana of the earth categoiy. So Raid 
gnim dditafi kftvd mdydntarfC means from the earth categoiy upto 
mdyd. All these rest in the body i.e., the essential nature o ra may 

i.e. in ^sa\ • u irt* 

Viivadi means from ^uddhavidyd up to andirita iva wit a 

AnantabL=^an-^anta-\-antah. An means the vowel a, mea^ 
the end of vowels i.e. visarga. Param that which expands \vtsarga 
makam) i.e., expands in Suddhavidya, Isvara and Sadasiva. 



242 

P ard- 'Trisikd-Vivarana 

Saktt-trayam!^-means that which consists of three iaktis viz. iccha, 
jnana and kriya. That which is constituted by these, i.e. sa-\-au+ 
ah: IS conadered to be the supreme. The same thing has been 
declared by the verse, beginning with the phoneme ‘ja’. (The 
phoneme .a’ is s)^bolic of 31 tattvas from the earth up to mayS, 
au IS symbohe of Suddhavidya, Isvara, and Sadasiva and ‘ah' 

the 36 


iNUTliS 

1. Brahmadehagam: Brahma in this context means ‘m’ This 

rrs « ”tI .ha. 

b^atona n T « droPPed. and Va’ is considared to 

The first 

the supreme. emaimng and the second para means 

tdz.' iftfsSXTsId-"“t" 

Text of the Verse 

tadantarvarti yatkiScit 

A«URt^s“^S‘^™ASTH:XAM , 

'AISVARAM jRanam ASNUTE 1123 !I 

T R ANSLATION 

.ha“t«A *' “U 'hat reposing in 

way i.e. whhou a„v S' S “ l"- 

soon enough obtairis the n” SS""' The limited individual 
the realization of 'he Divine (after 


Abhinavagupta 


243 


Translation OF the Commentary (p. 92, 1. 7 to 1. 10) 

Whatever is established in a variegated way i.e, in bheddbheda 
and bheda in the universe, all that reposes in the central seminal 
mantra saufi in a pure state i.e. in a state of imdifferentiated unity. 
Anuh (1) one who breathes or (2) one who experiences and 
utters in a limited way. Even he (after the realization of sauli) 
becomes topmost of living beings {murdhanyo bhaoan) and obtains 
by the influence of this mantra {tatprabhdvat) the Divine knowledge 
very soon. How? 

Text of the Verse 

TAGGODAKAH §IVOj5lEYAH 

sarvajRah PARAMESVARAH / 

SARVAGO NIRMALAH SVAGGHAS 

TRPTAH SVAYATANAH §UGIH // 24 // 

Translation 

(The first line has two senses:) (1) The who inspires to 
know the secret of that amrta-bija should be considered as Siva. 

(2) It should be known that He who inspires to know this 
mantra is Siva. He is unknown to others but He is Himself omni¬ 
scient, Supreme Lord. He is omnipresent, spotless, pure, fully 
satisfied, abiding in His own essential nature, unsullied. 

Translation of the Commentary (p. 92,1. 16 to 1. 19) 

The guru or spiritual director who inspires this mantra to rea¬ 
lize should be understood to be Siva Himself. It is Siva alone 
who inspires it. He is beyond comprehension, for he is the (eter¬ 
nal) subject (and cannot be reduced to an object). Svdyatana 
is one who (while abiding in his essential nature) emanates his 
own {sva) ayas i.e., the existence or objects in the form of con¬ 
sciousness. All this has been delineated in detail (earlier). 

Thus having described it in detail, the scripture emphasizes 
the purport in conclusion. 

Text of Verses 25 and 26 

YATHA NYAGRODHABIJASTHA5 
SAKTIRGPO MAHADRUMAH/ 



244 


Para-Trisika- Vivarana 


TATHA HRDAYABlJASTHAM 

JAGADETACCARACARAM // 25 // 
EVAM YO VETTI TATTVENA 

TASYA NIRVAivtagAMINI / 
DiKSA BHAVATYASAMDIGDHA 

TILAJYAHUTIVARJITA // 26 // 


Translation 

As the great banyan tree lies in the form of potency in its 
seed, even so this universe with all the mobile and immobile 
beings lies in the seminal mantra {sauh), the very heart of the 
Supreme. 25. 

He who knows this mantra in its essence, becomes competent 
for imtiation leading to nirvana (liberation) undoubtedly, without 
any formal ceremony consisting of oblation {ahuti) with sesamum 
indicum {tila) axid ghee (melted butter). 26. 


Translation OF THE Commentary (p. 93, 1. 7 to p. 94, 1. 5 ) 

It has already been said that there is nothing in this world 

which IS simply non-existent. Everything (in its place) is all- 

inclusive. Just as in the seed of the banyan tree lie all the re- 

, . p 2 .rts, yiz.^ sprout, branches, leaves, and fruits, even so 

victio^'^f'^tL' ^ of the Supreme. The certain con- 

(nirviif, u ” undoubted initiation for liberation 

{nirvana). As has been said; 

thi'ZhJn '' of ambrosia leading to immortality; 

he inZr Self (lit. grip of Self). This alone^ 

leading to identity with 

There are other kinds of initiation also which may offer worldlv 

S"rTK\“ 

in t e weights of a balance, though there may be only a 

erence m the measure of a thing only by slightly raising or 
lowertng the balance, even so there occurs a ^ood deal ofdi- 
fference m respect of the knowledge of space, time, and enjoy. 

men o llte higher and higher tat/aoj (categories of existence). 


Abhinavagupta ^ 

It is even possible that the sphere of experience (samvcdana) 
rising higher and liigher may exceed the thirty-six categories. 
Since insight {samvedana^ into the hrdaya~bija or sauh is initiation 
{diksa), therefore is it said that vira SLud yogini who have pene¬ 
trated this insight [etat samvit amipravisto) stand initiated {kita^ 
diksan) by the grace of the I-consciousness described as revered, 
supreme Bhairava who is the ruler of the collective whole {cakre^ 
ivara^ of the twelve* external and internal sense-divinities {tcl~ 
imi-devata-dvada^aka) that are constantly present {satatodita) in 
the supreme reality {para-sattd) and are transcendent to mdyd 
(amdyiya). 25-26. 

Thus the way in which the transcendental (anuttara) state 
occurs without abandoning the external extension has been 
determined many a time both separately and in a composite way. 

Now this is what is to be said. In every Sastra it is said. Those 
who are devoted to hrdaya-bija or sauh, the very import of Trika, 
even when they do not reaUzc its full virility, are the very loi , 
in a veiled form, having entered the human body. 

How is this worship to be performed? Even though this ex 
ternal worship is without its full virility, there must be in it t e 
impact of anuttara-reaXity {anuttara sattd), for anuttara is ^.fter a 
anuttara. What is the operational method of this worship, n 
order to give a definite answer to this query, the author ay 
down the following verses; 

Text of the Verse 


mOrdhni vaktre ca hrdaye 

GUHYE MORTAU TATHAIVA _CA / 

nyAsam krtvA SikhAm baddhvA 

SAPTAVIMSATIMANTRITAM II 27 // 
Translation 


External Worship 

After making nydsa^ on skull {murdhd), mouth, heart, 
part,2 and the whole body^ and tying the tuft of the hair ( ^ 
with twenty-seven mantras. 


♦The twelve sense-divinities are 5 organs of sense plus 5 organs of 
plus manas and buddhi. 



246 


Para- Trisika^Vivarana 


Notes 

This external worship is to be performed by vira and yopini 
together. s > 

1. Nyasa\ mental assignment of various parts of the body to 
deities (by placing the fingers on them). 

2. The private part of both vlra and yogini. 

3. The mantra has to be repeated five times on each part for 
each of the five deities, viz. Isana, Tatpuru?a, Aghora, Vama- 
deva and Sadyojata with the mantras of Matrka and Mdlini. The 
Matrka mantra is aksa hrirri and the Malini mantra is napha hrirn. 
The dvartana or repetition is made in the following way: 


25 mantras 


First dvartana or repetition: 

1 • aksa hiim xsanamurdhne namah 

2. napha hrim tatpurusa vaktraya namah 

3. aksa hrim aghorahrdayaya namah 

4. napha hrirn vamadevaguhyaya namah 

5. aksa hrirn sadyojatamurtaye namah 
Second dvartana: 


i • aksa hrirn tatpurusamurdhne namah 

2. napha hrirn aghora vaktraya namah 
3^ aksa hrirn vamadevahrdayaya namah 
napha hrirn sadyojataguhyaya namah 
5. aksa hrirn isanamurtaye namah 
Third dvartana : 

1. aksa hrirn aghoramurdhne namah 

2. napha hrirn vamadevavaktraya namah 
aksa hrirn sadyojatahrdayaya namah 

4. napha hrirn isanaguhyaya namah 

5. aksa hrirn tatpurusamurtaye namah 
Fourth dvartana: 


• aksa hrirn vamadevamurdhne namah 

2. napha hrirn sadyojatavaktraya namah 

3. aksa Iirirn isanahrdayaya namah 

4. napha hrirn tatpurusaguhyaya namah 

5. aksa hrirn aghoramurtaye namah 


Abhinavagupta 


247 


Fifth dvartana: 

1 . aksa hrim sadyojatamurdhne namah 

2 . napha hrim isanavaktraya namah 

3. aksa hrim tatpurusahrdayaya namah 

4. napha hrim aghoraguhyaya namah 

5. aksa hrim vamadevamurtaye namah 


27 mantras for tying the tuft of hair {Sikhd) 


1 . S^stirupecchatmikaya Sikhaya bandh- karomi namah 


2 . 

3. 

4. 

5. 

6 . 

7. 

8 . 

9. 

10 . 

11 . 

12 . 

13. 

14. 

15. 

16. 

17. 

18. 

19. 

20 . 
21 . 
22 . 


pararupaya anam 

55 parapararupaya ,5 55 

5 , apararupaya „ „ 

Srstirupajhanatmikaya 

pararupaya ,5 5 ? 

55 parapararupaya 5 , 5 , 

5 , apararupaya „ 55 

Srstirupakriyatmikaya 

pararupaya ,, 5 , 

55 parapararupaya ,, 5 , 

55 apararupaya 55 55 

Sthiti rupecchatmikaya 

pararupaya 5 , 55 

55 parapararupaya 5 , 55 

55 apararupaya „ ,3 

Sthiti rupajhanatmikaya 

pararupaya 5 , 55 

55 parapararupaya „ 55 

,5 apararupaya 5 , 53 

Sthiti rupakriyatmikaya 

pararupaya 5 , 53 

55 parapararupaya 5 , 53 

55 apararupaya 55 53 

Scunhararupecchatmikaya 

pararupaya 55 33 

55 parapararupaya 5 , 53 

55 apararupaya 5 , 53 

. Samhararupajhanatmikaya 

pararupaya ,, „ 


33 

33 


33 

33 


33 

33 

33 


33 

33 


33 

33 


33 

33 

33 


Pard-Trisikd- Vivarana 


248 


23. „ 

parapararupaya 

24. „ 

apararupaya 

25. Sarnhararupakriyatmikaya 


pararupaya 

26. „ 

parapararupaya 

27. „ 

apararupaya 


Text 

EKAIKAM TU DISAM BANDHAM 
DASANAM API YOJAYET / 
tAlatrayam PURA DATTVA 

SASABDAM VIGHNASANTAYE // 28 // 

Translation 

Then one should fetter the ten directions with only one mantra 
(viz, sauh)^ but before doing so, in order to remove all obstacles, 
one should clap three times by muttering inwardly (through 
madhyama vdni) s (the first time), au (the second time), ah (the 
third time). 


Notes 

The directions have to be fettered thus: 

1. Sauh indradisa bandhanam karomi namah 

2. Sauh agnidisa bandhanam karomi namah 

3. Sauh yamadisa bandhanam karomi namah 

4. Sauh nairrtyadisa bandhanam karomi namah 

5. Sauh varunadisa bandhanam karomi namah 

6. Sauh vayudisa bandhanam karomi namah 

7. Sauh kuberadisa bandhanam karomi namah 

8. Sauh Isanadisa bandhanarn karomi namah 

9. Sauh urdhvadisa bandhanam karomi namah 

10. Sauh adhodisa bandhanam karomi namah 

Text 

SikhAsamkhyabhijaptena 

TOYENABHYUKSAYET TATAR / 
PUSPADIKAM KRAMAT sarvam 

LINGE VA STHANDILE’THAVA // 29 // 


Ahhinavagupia 


249 


Translation 

Then after consecrating water with the same number oi jap as 
as are meant for tying the tuft of hair, i.e. the same twenty- 
seven mantras as are meant for iikha-bandhana, one should sprinkle 
with the consecrated water over flowers and all other objects of 
worship successively. All this should be done by the vira on the 
female organ {sthanjila) of \htyogini and by lYi^yogini on the male 
organ {lihga) of the vira. 

Text 

caturdaSAbhijaptena 

puspei^As.anakalpana / 

TATRA SRSTIM YAJED 

VlRAH PUNAREVASANAM TATAR // 30 // 

Translation 

One has to form a seat with flowers consecrated with fourteen 
mantras by putting a dot on each of the vowels from to au • 
The vira should worship the srsti~bija {hrdaya-bija)^ on this seat and 
then should fashion another seat by means of the same process. 

Notes 

1. The flowers have to be consecrated with fourteen mantras 
in the following way: 


1. am 

asanapaksam 

sodhayami 

namah 

2. am 

55 

55 

55 

55 

3. ini 

55 

55 

55 

55 

4. irn 

55 

55 

55 

55 

5. um 

55 

55 

55 

55 

6. um 

55 

55 

55 

55 

7. rm 

55 

55 

55 

55 

8. frn 

55 

55 

55 

55 

9. im 

55 

55 

55 

55 

10. im 

55 

55 

55 

55 

11. em 

55 

55 

55 

55 

12. aim 

55 

55 

55 

55 

13. orn 

55 

55 

55 

55 

14. aum 

55 

55 

55 

55 


250 


Para-Trisika-Vxoar<u}a 


2- This whole practice is shrouded in mystery. 

The Internal Supreme Worship 

Text 

SR§TI¥ tu samputikrtya 

paS cad yajanam Arabhet / 
SARVATATTVA-SUSAMPORl^Ahl 

SARVABHARAUA-BHCTSItXm //31// 

YAJED DEVll^ MAHESANIIVI 

saptavii^ati-mantritAm 

TATAy SUGANDHIPUSPAISTU 

YATHASAKTYA SAMARCAYET 1132 II 
4 PtJjAYET PARAYA BHAKTYA 

AtmAnai^ ca nivedayet / 

EVAhl YAJANAM AKHYATAM ' 

AGNIKARYE’PYAYAM VIDHiy II 33 // 
Translation 

the'^tema/r^"^'^'*'"^ start theyajana i.e. 

wW the goddess 

rf^enc^ k ^ '^te tattvas or categories 

secS S’th '^hh all the ornaments and who is con- 

Then with fragrjmt^fl^'^°'^*^ descnbed) twentyseven mantras. 
honour acconiSe to htr” °K-r 

fakH).^ 31-32. ^ ^ capabihty together withj^o^wi (jathS- 

de™ “ :S- should 

temal worshin ha, vI themselves completely to her. The in- 
cedure should be foUowed this way. The same pro- 

libation to Sre a^ciatod adth'tS 

Notes 

Tl^ samput^arana of sfsti has two meanings viz 1 The 

W ’’™ ' ta which di the ietters 

aZj»^“ ^ present. 2. It aU, means the coitus of aim 

2. There is double meaning in yathSiakH also. Literally, it 



Abhinavagupta 


251 


means, not transgressing one’s capacity or capability. It also 
suggests that the worsliip has to be performed along with lakti 

i.e., withyogim in this context. 

Text of the Commentary 

From mUrdhadini on p. 95,1.13 up to mdlinyddimantrdmmanuprave^a 
on p. 95, 1. 19. 

Translation of the Commentary 

The esoteric aspect of the limbs pertaining to nydsa 

The nydsa on the head etc., is all right from the exoteric point 
of view. Really speaking, however, they being symbolic of man^ 
tra are 

(1) indications of the five quintuple gross elements, viz. from 
ether down to earth which are said to be the external forms 
of the Supreme brahma^ 

(2) essence of Isana, Tatpuru§a, Aghora, Vamadeva, and 
Sadyojata, the five mouths of Bhairava, 

(3) forms of cit (consciousness), unmesa in the sense of dnanda 
or bliss, icchd or Willy jndna or knowledge, kriyd or activity 

Their mantras are the following: 

1. iidnamurdhney 2. tatpurusa-vaktrdyay 3. aghorahrdaydyay 
4. vdmadeva-guhydyay 5. sadyojita^murtaye. 

Really speaking there is no difference among the five {etat panca- 
ka-avibhdgdtmakatve). Each of these is quintuple. Therefore, the 
number of the mantras is twentyfive. The Mdlini mantra {nap/m 
hrirp,) and Mdtfkd mantra {aksa hrirp) are both included within 
these twentyfive. 


Notes 

The esoteric aspect oinydsa would be the following: 

Number Limb {ahga) Tattva Mukha of Sakti 

Siva 

1. Murdha (head) Akala (ether) Isana Cit 

2. Vaktra (mouth) Vayu (air) Tatpuru§a Ananda 

3. Hrdaya (heart) Agni (fire) Aghora Iccha 


252 


Pard-Trisikd- Vivarana 


4. Guhya Jala (water) Vamadeva Jnana 

(private part) 

5. Sarvahga (murti, Prthivi (earth) Sadyojata Kriya 
the whole body) 

Text 

From tisraJca devyah on p. 95,1.19 upto sarvasarvdtmakatva nima- 
yenaiva on p. 96, 1. 3. 


1 RANSLATION 

Sikha-bandhana (tying the tuft of hair): 

There have become nine forms of the three goddesses, viz. para, 
parapara, and apara because of each of them being connected with 
iccM jnana and kriya. Each of them being associated with smi, 
an sarnhdra again becomes threefold. Thus their number 
becom^ twenty-seven. All of them derive their nurture from 

Sif autonomy of the Divine diffused from 

of the ^^^S^^dicates identity, the quintessence 

oi the non-differentiation of all. 

telv ve^^ ™oiith etc., have been indicated separa- 

alridv b^^^ of them is specifying the other. This fact has 

Text 

meva on on p. 96, 1. 3 upto ityetadapi nirnita- 


Translation 

J^i^dbandhana : 

wfth referenr^^^t indicate directions. These are ten 

tvinff nr f tt ^ one’s body. In this case also, 

tying or fettering is symboUc of Self-realization. 

Three clappings', 

nf be done with three clappings. Clapping is symbolic 

stabihty ipratisfhd) i.e., being stable in Self. In clapping, the 
hrdayabtja starting with V’ is the mantra i.e. the first clapping 


Abhinavagupta 


253 


should be done with .he muttering of V, the second with the 
muttering of aUy the third with the muttering of ah. 

The mantra should be a mere mumble i.e. it should be uttered 
only indistinctly in madhyamd vdni. Inner vimar§a is the essence of 
sounding. That is accomplished in madhyamd vdni. It has been 
stated frequently that vaikhari or gross speech is only an appendage 
of madhyamd vdni i.e. gross speech is only external manifestation 
of what is inwardly mumbled in madhyamd. 

Pacification of obstacles: 

(In the esoteric sense), obstacles are the stain of waves of diff¬ 
erence of which the essence is limitation and division in the Su¬ 
preme Self {paramdtmani) wliich is free of all difference and divi¬ 
sion. Their pacification connotes identification with the Bhairava- 
ocean in which there is no wave of difference or division. 

As has been said by venerable Somananda: 

“May Siva who has entered into us as (the empirical) subject 
make obeisance by Himself to Siva who is extended as the uni¬ 
verse by means of pard who is His own Sakti in order to remove all 
obstacles which are but Himself.” (S.D. I, 1) 

Arghya-pdtra: 

Arghya-patra-vidhi is the ceremony for purifying the water and 
the small vessel containing the water to be offered to the deity. 
Both the vessel and the water to be sprinkled should be consecra¬ 
ted first with the twenty-seven mantras mentioned before. Water 
in this context means everything that melts the heart {hr day a-- 
dravatma^ i.e. wine) because of non-restraint and non-hesitation. 

So far as flower is concerned, it has already been explained. 
Lihga-Emblem: 

With regard to the worship of the emblem {lihga)y the view 
expressed in the following verse should be borne in mind: 

“Do not worship the emblem of Siva made of clay or stone or 
mineral or gem. Worship that spiritual emblem in which is 
absorbed the entire universe consisting of the mobile and im¬ 
mobile beings” (M.V. XVHI, 2-3). 

This has also been conclusively explained. 

Text 

From vUvdtmanitattve on p. 96, 1. 18 upto ^abdapratitipaurva^ 
paryamdtre on p. 97, 1. 4. 


254 


Para- Trisikd- Vivara^^ 


Translation 

Asana (Seat): 

That IS asana (seat) which is determined by the agent through 
Ills autonomy, for when the aspect of universahty is the main 
principle, then in the act of sitting, the location and seat are 
determined through autonomy only. 

Fourteenth Mantra: 

A*/ *”!?"™?," *• already been said that 

that).s the Ml, nr trident (which symbolizes icchaJMm and 

neff from vT'fc J i «.) the series of pho- 

wUa is Identified ^ t “e ptema v''m W 

same w^frrow‘''f •>’' 

««rnd h “ 

trikona is the ddheya.) * ^ o-dhara and Siva- 

^has been said in Bhagavadgita: 

beings (as the ^ubjea)* atd^ alf 

regards all things as the same”. (vST. one’s Self 

The sarnputikarana of sjsti: 

I. Pmn, the point ofm„e of esoteric worshib or,i o 

»-■ .hzo„.h 


from 


principle throughTj;::!^:"^,:^^^^^^ in the Supreme 
samputa should be made by me^T^ f ^ ^T^ti implies that 
all the letters severally from ‘a’ to 'k ^ ^ Contra sauh at first of 
all the letters. It has already beerilatncumulatively of 
regressus ad infinitum {anavastha) in this m 

In the case of Sakti and Saktiman i / 
partner, samputikarana of srsfi implies th ’ female and male 
coitus between the vira and jogini and tli« enjoyment of 

their union is also used. ^'rbstance produced by 


-^^hinavagupta 

In ‘sarpputikrtya' occurring in the verse 31, there is the use of 
the suffix 'ktvd’ merely to show the precedence and succession of 
"'^'ords. 


Notes 

The words srsfi and samputikarana have two meanings. In the 
first case, sTsti denotes vama-srsth the series of phonemes from 
to ^ksa\ Samputikarana in this context is a techmcal word 
’which means the utterance of an additional mantra before and 
^fter the principal mantra. For instance, there is sampufa of aurn 
both before and after the principal gdyatri mantra. In the present 
^ase, there would be the sampufa of^aham^ mantra both before and 
^fter the ^sauh^ mantra. 

Sampufa is a hemispherical bowl with two movable covers 
wliich encloses something. Here the mantra ahaiji is the sarjipufa 
which encloses the mantra sauh. 

In the second case, STsfi denotes conjugal relation and sampufi^ 
karana denotes the actual coitus of the tw'^o. The substance 
refers to kun<jiagolaka^ cf. TA XXIX, 22-24. 

Note of the Editor: Cf. Tantrasara 22: One should meditate 
apon the dsana as the location and the located object, as identified 
with pure consciousness. The sarnpufikarana is to be done bet 
Ween the universe {yiiva) and pure consciousness (sarfivit)* 

Text 

From sarvatattvaih susfhu abhedena on p. 97, 1. 4 to triiyd ca 
tatraivoktd on p. 97, 1. 12. 


Translation 

Sarvatattvaih,,.purnatvam —means that the supreme Devi is 
fully {sarpyak) and invariably [anapdyitaya) equipped with 
the tattvas. _ 

She is decorated with all the dbharanas (ornaments). This 
means— 

1. {Sarvdbharana ^sarvatra d-bharanam) 

The Supreme goddess is making every-thing in all directiom 
{sarvatra)^ even in the atoms wholly (samantdt) her own {dtmi- 
karanam). 


256 


Para- Trisikd- Vivarana 


2. {Sarvdbharana = sarvair^d-bharanam ) 

It has already been explained that all external objects, such 
as jar etc., all inner experiences, such as pleasure etc., all ex- 
penents such as animal, man, Brahma, Visnu, Rudra, Mantra, 
badasrva are like congruous limbs {avayava) of the Supreme god- 
dess so that her being a uniform {ekarasa) organism (avayavi) 
IS fully justified. That is why meditation on any definite form or 
^?&ial prescribed, for all this is (only) 

(If It IS not necessary to meditate on any definite form or wea- 
pon o t e goddess), how can one desirous of mounting to the 
ghest stage m spirituality, and desirous of following the path 
recommended by Trika achieve his object^ ^ 

mount^'lf'th^^ constrained to 

foUow the process advocated by Siddha-tantra etc., let him resort 
of meditation etc. prescribed according to 
not privileeed t ^adalayenazva nirupita). Such a person is 

HmiLion or rStrTctSn.^’ 

(Explanation oiyajed...vidhik, verses 32 and 33) 

scel^'and'SL"'"""^ So far as 

described Th^w fthey have been conclusively 

seme o?wS’ 1 ^-T has been used in the 

rumental suffix has also been used in that sense. 

Text 

From parayaiva hydayarupaya bujavet on n 07 1 19 . • ■ 

taprayameva on p. 98,1. 18 ^ ^ ° 

Translation 

wirt'^heTn^d^STot? 

(Three kinds of bhakti ): 

\.{Bhakti from the root ‘ihaf meaning 'to serve') 

enteringtalok? T'‘< T*"' (“‘'“""J'-) bv 

siveness JZeS)! " ’ ‘‘“'’•"is- 


Abhinavagupta 


257 


2. {Bhakti from the root ^bkaf meaning ‘to divide’) 

Bhaktyd —^with the self-contrived division of the worshipped 
and the worshipper. The one to be worshipped is (mxaginatively) 
fashioned by oneself. The self-created object of worship has to be 
supreme, full of autonomy and consciousness for such is the power 
of the autonomy of anuttara (the Absolute). It cannot be insen¬ 
tient like ajar. That is the distinction of this system {iti vUesatra). 
It has been rightly said in Isvara-pratyabhijha: 

“The Lord, by His non-duaUstic autonomy, having fashioned 
His own free self into Isvara (Bralima, Visnu etc.) causes the 
world to worship Himself through them”. (I. 5, 16) 

3. {Bhakti as samdve^a or compenetration) 

By samdve§a which is formally known as worship, one realizes 
the Supreme Reality (pamm tattvam laksyate). The recognition of 
samdve§a in all forms of ritual observance {sarva-kriydsu)^ is the 
best means (to the realization of Supreme Reality), just as 
written letters are a means for the production and understanding 
of all empirical phonemes, and the empirical phonemes are a 
means of penetration into their energy. 

Offering of One^s Self 

Atmdnarp. nivedayet means one should offer one’s self, for there 
is nothing else worth offering than this. The purport is that 
(according to the etymology of ^nivedayet'" \ nih —completely, 
yet —one should experience or understand oneself). One shou , 
in conformity to the Absolute Reality, consider one’s Self to be 
the Absolute Reality itself. Here the potential mood {lin) in ntve 
dayet has been used in the sense of possibility, for it has alrea y 
been said that any stance connected with Self is always one o 
possibility. 

Tajana —homage 

The meaning of the expression ^dkhydtanC occurring in 
is d-samantdty sarvatray sadd i.e., wholly, everywhere, always. 
tarn connotes the khydti or realization of the supreme, pure nature 
of Siva. This is the true yajana or homage of the goddess^ Para 
sarjfivit (Supreme Consciousness). The root in yajam con¬ 
notes three meanings: 

(1) Taja in the sense of worship means: ‘This is her tiue wor¬ 
ship’. 


258 


Pcra-Trisika- VivOTOV^ 


(2) Taja in the sense oisanigati means: ‘This kind of worship 
offers the opportunity of appropriate meeting {samyag-gamana) 
of the worshipper and the worshipped, in other words the iden¬ 
tity with the Supreme.’ 

(3) Taj in the sense to make an offer, to donate’ means the 
following: ‘This worship by removing the narrow, limited sense 
of I-consciousness of the empirical individual, denotes the sense 
of umfication of the self ^vith the perfect mass of Consciousness 
■which is Siva-Sakti.’ 

Agnikdrya or oblation in the sacrificial fire 

This is the real oblation in the sacrificial fire, viz. the oblation, 
i.e. inner burning of the residual traces of all desires in the mighty 

IZn |^P^^%®hairava which is always ablaze with the 
^rant of Supreme Saku excited by union with Siva, which is 
bu^ng brightly mth the eager consumption of all objects as 

bttter^ft 

Utter of wor dly attac^ents. This alone is the real injunction 
egarding oblation right up to initiation. There is none other 
different from this. This is the real purport of it. 

nature—tliis is the highest 

Amonffalltl^* ^ initiation. This is the real sacrifice, 
^ong all the ceremonies, this is the highest rite.” 

«arlier^a*rt^ r earlier that just as in other scriptures, in the 

the lattL '^th mantra are described, in 

Sastra it fs not ^ Tv?" u jVwna, in the present 

^y^pi anuttaram^ h^ b^n carried"" 

Sacrifice inilT ^ this work, 

and tV,?.* • t'^^'^monies etc. are only aspects of 

y« and that IS really (transcendent) 

everS Tf'"""T having said that hr^ayabija endures 

ned tTe T «« undivided character, enjoi- 

"he oCsrui, l„ ,he beg „2g, 

crepancv n ^ ‘m *’ in this, nor is dis- 

yepMcy per„.vable. Nor ,he Triia system dependent on 
j^.^™rSast™ thatadTOcate„,lrert,ise. There has been a 
^i^cation of all these points. (27-33) 


259 


^^hinavagupta 


Notes 

1. Arani-. A piece of wood, taken generally from Sami tree, 
^sed for kindling the sacred fire by attrition. 

2. Sruk^ sruva-{sruc): A sort of wooden ladle for pouring 
■clarified melted butter on sacrificial fire. 

Sruva or Sruvd is a small wooden ladle for pouring clarified 
belted butter into the large ladle or sruk. 

Text 

From kim evam updsdydm on p. 98, 1. 19 upto tarn yogamdrgam 
^^^upayitum grantha^eso'vatarati on p. 100, 1. 20. 

Translation 

What is the result of the worship of hrdaya-blja in this way. 
(In reply to this query), the book lays down the following. 

“Mentally dwelling on the hrdaya~bija {sauh), the adept w o 
performs the worship in the proper manner attains to his goa 
I-e. liberation while alive {jivan-mukti) (34) 

Translation of the Commentary 

1- Thus ceaselessly even in worldly affairs, the aspirant who 
carries on worship, while remembering the hrdaya-blja^ leaving 

3.side other disciplines like Kaulasastra, Saiva and Vaisnava 
Sastra, having entered into the essence i.e. hrdaya-bija of revere 
Bhairava, making an outward display of object just for pasUme, 
created by the blissful force of one’s own parasamvit (Supreme 
Consciousness), is verily liberated while alive. The use o t e 
''^ord ^smarand* (remembering) connotes the repetition o one s 
own experience, nothing else. In Srimata-Sastra also the same 
Idea has been expressed. 

2. The worshipper who has not penetrated into the very 
of the energy of the great mantra^ by rightly rememberii^ t c 
hrdaya-bija through the eflicacy of krama-pujd^ having gra ua y 
attained to the power of the mantra as hrdaya-bija, also achieves 
the reaUzation of the highest perfection or the power of the 
mantra of hrdaya-bija, either through the gradual superionty o 
the efficacy of the kramapujd or by himself, or through t e ex 
hortation from the mouth of a pleased guru (spiritual director) 
-and becomes liberated while alive. 



260 


Para-Trisikd-Vwarana 


In this process, there is neither any advantage nor any dis¬ 
advantage {khandand) in the (traditional) 'woTsh.ip oi ^dvdrapujd^^ 
or guru. That is why revered Somananda has laid down the 
following: 

In this matter an auspicious period {parva) prescribed accor-^ 
ding to Kula-Sastra and a pavitrarr? are meant only to enhance 
the propriety of the process of worship.” 


Notes 

1. Krama-pujd a regular course of graded worship as detailed 
in verses 27 to 33. 

2. Dvarapujd means the worship of Ganesa or Batuka. 

3. Pavitram as a noun means ‘a ring oi kuia grass worn on the 

fourth finger on certain reUgious occasions.’ The rite of offering 
pavitraka to the Lord: cf. Tantra-sara, 20, where it is described 
that after performing the worship of the Lord one should offer 4 
pavitrakas to Him: one goes down to the knee, one going down to 
navel, one to the throat and one on the head. They may be made 
of gold, pearl, jewels, kuJa grass or cotton threads with knots 
numbering 36 representing tattvas^ or bhuvanas^ varnas etc. They are 
generally offered to the deity or to the guru. 


(A SUMMARY OF THE CHAPTER) 


^pirants that have reached the prabuddha stage, that in 
^ c t e entire universe shines, that which (by itself) shines 
everywhere, that sparkling Light (which is both prakaia and 
vimaria) alone is the highest core of Reality.” 

Just as a she-ass or a mare expanding and contracting her 
li* simultaneously experiences de- 

occasion of the coitus of both {vira and 
tVi V. ^ V ^ 1 susumnd full of supreme delight, there is 

eart, t ro bing in the form of simultaneous expansion and 

on rac ion c aracterized by srs^i (i.e. srsfibija or sauh). Medi¬ 
tate on that. •. r . j 


That in which, whether meditating, remembering, reflecting, 
or acting, everything comes to rest, and from which everything 
comes forth m manifestation—that is the heart. 

That heart is only one i.e. shines primarily as nirvikalpa (in¬ 
determinate), in which abide other determinate knowledge 


Abhinavagupta 


261 


[pararp, vaikalpikam jndnam)^ the thirtysix categories of existence, 
expanse of (hundred and eight) bhuvanas (worlds), and all the 
experients from Siva to the limited souls—all these assuming 
diverse forms, though non-different from the highest Reality, 
making even the wonderful Supreme Consciousness [pardsamvii) 
variegated, appear as shining in it. 

The worship of this central reality is ever present in the heart 
of the aspirant. Whether he may be associated with any country, 
matter, activity, place, thought-construct, in every case, his mind 
is ever set upon the hrdaya~bija without the least hesitation. 

So far as krama-pujd is concerned, Trika discipline is of the 
opinion that with the observance of auspicious period prescribed 
by Kula-Sastra and by means of offering pavitraka the appro¬ 
priateness of this worship is increased. 

As has been said (with regard to krama-pujd ): 

As among fluid substances is semen, among phonemes is srsti- 
bijay i.e. sauhy among scriptures is Trika, in states of liberation is 
the attainment of the state of Bhairava, in meditation is the state 
of absorption, in vows is the pious observance of the viras (most 
excellent), even so, among auspicious occasions are those of Kula 
(most excellent), according to Trika-Sastra. 

The use oipavitraka is essential for the full accomplishment of 
the rites connected with krama-pujd. Those worshippers who do 
not carry out the injunction regarding the use of pavitraka four 
times, thrice, twice or at least once during the auspicious period 
do not know the significance of the auspicious period according 
to Kula-Sastra. In the case of such people, the potency of the 
mantra does not function at its maximum. 

Thus -the nature of anuttara (transcendental reality) has been 
described in detail. In it, there is no room for contemplation. In 
it only gnosis [prasamkhydnam) functions as the bearer of moun¬ 
tains fit for the burden of means {upoya-dhaureya-dharddharam 
dhatte) upto the end of firm realization of Self identified with 
hrdaya-bija which is characterized by steadfast spiritual delight. 

Now the yoga for those who are desirous of attaining super¬ 
normal powers (for show) has to be described. Though the super¬ 
normal powers pertaining to drstayogd}- are possible only by means 
of the autonomy of the Absolute and they are beyond the sphere 
of popularly known and determinate laws, yet they cannot 


262 


Para-Trisikd- Vivarana 


(wholly) transgress the divinely fixed order, ‘yet the means for 
the supernormal powers pertaining to strange matters has to be 
described with respect’, as said by Somananda in Siva-Dfsti. 

Even in the matter yoga for the display of supernormal 
powers {drsta-yoga) y there is no violation of the transcendental 
nature, for like the effort to attain the supernormal powers for 
display, their actual attainment, and the cessation of all effort in 
their maturity—everything is due to the grace of the Supreme. 
But in comparison to liberation in life, such an attainment would 
be said to be due to faint grace of the divine, for it does not lead to 
perfection.^ 

It is, however, Xh^yoga which is due to faint grace that is des¬ 
cribed in the remaining part of the book. 

Notes 

1. Drstayoga-siddhi: The supernormal powers which are meant 
for display to the people, and which arouse in them a weird sense 
of mystery are said to be "dfsta-yoga-siddhV. 

2. That alone is said to be the highest yoga which leads the 
aspirant to the recognition of his self as identical with the divine 
I-consciousness, and the world as the glow of Siva’s Light in 
various forms. 


Text of the verse 

ADYANTARAHITAM BijAM 

VIKASAT TITHIMADHYAGAM / 

hrtpadmAntargatam dhyAyet 

SOMAmSam NITYAM ABHYASET // 35 II 
Translation 

The yogi must meditate on this btja which has neither begin- 
which has expanded into fifteen vowels {vikasat- 
titkimadhyagam) and which resides in the heart-lotus of Siva. He 
^ ^ ^ practise the lunar part {somdni^am, i.e. view all objects 

of the world as nothing but the manifestation of sauh). 

Commentary 

From etadeva on p. 101, 1. 1 upto bham-dhaneSvaraSartna, 1. 10. 


Abhinavagupta 


263 


Translation of the Commentary 
Explanation from the point of view of Sdktopdya 
Anddya-antam bijam 

This central seminal mantra {hrdayabija or sauh) is wthout 
beginning or end (1) for it does not require any extraneous light, 
i.e. it shines by its own light [dipakdbhavdt), (2) for it is wtho.ut 
variation, without coming in and going out (gamdgama-sunyatvdt)^ 
(3) for it is ever actively present {satatoditatvdt). 

Vikasat and tithimadhyagam: 

This, on the one hand, has expanded in the form of the ex¬ 
ternal objective world and thus reached its complete manifes¬ 
tation. On the other hand, it inheres in the sixteen tithis,^ being 
their innermost essence. 

Hrtpadmdntargatarji dhydyet : 

The yogi should meditate on kanda and guhya (i.e. the male 
yogi or vita on the female organ {guhya) and the femaleor 
yogini on the male organ {kanda)^ as if it were the heart-lotus. 
These two organs have been called ‘lotus’ only in a figurative sense, 
for like lotus they are endowed with the characteristic of contrac¬ 
tion and expansion {sahkoca-vikdsa-dharma-upacarita-padmabhdve). 

Kihcdsya dhydnam dha : 

What sort of meditation is this? The following is its descrip¬ 
tion {dha ): 

Somdm^am nityam abhyaset—abhyaset to be taken in the sense o 
abhi-\-asyet. 

The aspirant should cast the somdnda i.e. apdna current (the 
current of inhalation) full of sixteen from all sides {abhitah) 

towards the male organ or the female organ. This means that the 
aspirant should project the apdna current of breath which is 
synonymous with full moon into hrtkamikd^ up to puspa i.e. the 
point of origin of the creative energy existing in each one at an 

inner distance of twelve fingers. 

Then after coming in contact with amrta i.e. kundalini-iakti^ 
in accordance with the inner vibration that is surging up, he 
acquires kdkacahciiputa-mudra^ characterized by the electro-mag¬ 
netism of Sakti-sparia. 


264 


Para-Tri§ikd- Vivarana 


Then the apdna current being withdrawn and expanding with 
the relish of the nectar of Sakti, excites the vibration within. 
The aspirant should make the apdna current fully developed by 
drinking in the nectar which is churned out by the vibratory 
force. 

After this, at the moment of the rise of the prdna {surya kald)^ 
the exhalatory breath-current, resting in vowel-less (vowel¬ 
less s oisank mantra)^ he should continue his practice, supported 
by the experience of thrill, stoppage (of breath), an inner sensa¬ 
tion of springing up, tears, tremor etc. This is §dktopdya accor¬ 
ding to Bhatta Dhanesvara Sarma. 


Notes 

1. The tulis of pranacara are i+15+j = 16. The tutis of 

apana-cara are = 15 . 

2 . Hrt-kamika is a centre in susumnd. 

3. Kakacancuputa-mudra: When the apdna current pierces the 

there is contact with Sakti. At this moment, the kdka- 
cancuputa mudrd is formed and as a result the vowel-less j-w 
sensation arises. 

anslation of the 35th verse according to Sdmbhava-tipdya 

beginning or end. Of the mantra 
apdna heinv rT ^ ^tokens prdna, and ‘aw’-part which betokens 
The art f ^'^oured, what remains is only the visarga (:)-part. 

Seen t the sixteenth kald inherent in the 

realized onir-^'^fh^^^ Passage oiprdna and apdna. This has to be 

One should always practise the 
Tnd objects like blue etc. 


INOTE 


, essential difference between bindu-kald and visarga- 

kala. The sixteenth visarga-kald itself assumes the form of the 
sewnteenth bmdu-kala. In the inner aspect visarga becomes bindu 
and in the external aspect, bindu becomes visarga. 


Abhinavagupta 


265 


Commentary on the above 

^loom adyantarahitam sakdramdtram, p. 101,1. 11 upto sambhdva- 
ndyam lin, p. 101, 1. 24. 

2 . Explanation according to idmbhava updya\ 

The aspirant should make the hrdaya-bija^ (i.e. sauK) without 
beginning or end i.e. without and so that only V remains. 
Then together with the sixteen tithis i.e. ‘a’ to ^ah\ i.e. together 
with the sixteen-phased apdna current, he should project it by the 
contrivance oi gras ana (dissolution) into hrdaya (i.e. kanda ov guhya, 
male or female organ). Just as in pouring water in a pipe, there 
is at first movement with slow tempo {calana)^ then medium 
tempo {kampana)^ and finally fast tempo {spand'ana)^ so by the 
practice of slow, medium and fast tempo, the aspirant should 
penetrate mulddhdra^ trikona^ bhadrakdli, kanda^ hrdaya and mukha^ 
i.e. hrt-karnikd. After this, simultaneously using slow, medium, 
and fast movement he reaches the culminating point at which 
there is a tremendous current owing to which both prdna {surya) 
and apdna (soma) become dissolved. 

From the point of view of succession of the phonemes, without 
the beginning and the next i.e. without ‘j’ and au of hrdaya bija 
(ddyantdbhydm etaUbijarri'^mdtrkdpeksayd aukdra’-sakdrdbhydm rahitaiji) 
is meant the sixteenth kald, viz. the visarga. 

(1) which is without ^au^ denoting apdna and ^s^ denoting 
prdna^ 

(2) the acquaintance of whose virility can be obtained only by 
vUlesana^ 

(3) which is dhruva i.e. invariable anuttara^ 

(4) which is very Siva (visargdtmakam)^ 

(5) which is the very centre of the expanding fifteen tithis and 
in which there is no tithi whatsoever, that is to say in which there 
is neither prdna nor apdna^ and in which are swallowed up all the 
sixteen digits. 

The aspirant rises even higher than this which is the seventeenth 
kald^ the commencement oiurdhvakunialini. He or she should always 
meditate on the amrta-am§a, which is the sixteenth aspect i.e. the 
visarga-kald in the hrtkamala or in other words the generative 
organ of vira or yogini. This is what my guru (Sambhunatha) 
says. 


266 


Para- TriHka- Vimrana 


The mystic explanation of somarrda is the following: 

According to the etymological analysis— saha umayd {vartate) 
i.e. he who abides with Uma or Sakti, soma means Siva, for Siva 
is constantly in union with goddess pard§akti^ and is in a state of 
spanda {ksobhena) due to union which is indicative of the state of 
churning together of the two tattvas. Am§a in somarrda means 
that all objects, internal like pleasure and external like blue, are 
like organs of the organic whole who is Siva, and who is perfect 
I-consciousness. 

So the aspirant should practise the meditation over and over 
again wth japa of his senses both in an extroverted way in 
which he regards objective manifestation {srsti) as Siva and in an 
introverted way in which he regards the withdrawal of mani¬ 
festation {sarnhara) also as Siva.* This is the ever-present hrdaya- 
japa. The potential mood has been used in the sense of possibi¬ 
lity, competence. 

Notes 

Muladhara-trikojia-bhadr a-kanda-hrt-mukha-mudrdsu : 

This mentions the mystic physiology of sxisumrid. In susumridy 
t ere is muladhara cakra. In rnuladhara^ there is a triangular form 

own as Siva-^nAowa. Joined with this, there is another one 
nown as bhadra-kali (Sakti-^nA:o«a). Then there is kanda which is 
^ sartipufa of Siva and Sakti. Then, there is the hrt or centre, 
ina y, there is the mukha-mudra or hrt-karriikd. All these together 
orm one hrt-padma. Its centre is the hrt-karnikd. This is the hr day a 
known as amrta~bija. 

Commentary 

p ^^0^ on p. 101 j 1. 25 upto evarn purvesvapi HokasutresUy 

Translation of the Commentary 
3. Explanation according to dmva updya: 

^ Others i.e. those who follow the dnava updya explain this Sutra 
in the following way: 

The starting point of breath is the heart, and the movement of 

Svamiji says that this is krama mudra described by Ksemaraja in Pratya- 
bhijha-Hrdayam in Sutra No. 19 . 


Abhinavagupta 


267 


prana from that point upto bdhya (external) dvidaidnta measures 
upto thirty-six fingers. From that point, beginning with prdjyadyu, 
{yuryatayd ulldsya ), the aspirant should restrain it at the point 
of bdhya-dvddaidnta for half a tufi^ (before beginning the move¬ 
ment of apdna-vdyu). Then after the rise of the movement of 
apdna vdyu which is known as the ^somakald^y the imperishable, 
amf/fl-like visarga^ the aspirant should increase the candrakald or 
in other words the apdna kald at every tufi which measures two 
and a quarter fingers. Thus when fifteen tufts are completed, the 
apdna vdyu becomes *‘somc^ or moon of sixteen digits at the point of 
hjipadmay i.e. the antah (inner) dvddaidntay for there has to be a 
pause of half a tufi there also. In this way, aU told the passage 
of apdna current is completed at thirty-six fingers. (Pause of i 
tufi a,t bdhya-dvdda^dnta-{-l5 apdna~cdra-\-p3,use of i tufi at antab^ 
dvdda^dnta totals to 16 tufis. Each tuft being of 2i fingers, the 
16 tufis make 36 fingers). 

In such a state, without beginning or end only means that since 
the pardbija or amrtabija {sauh) is ever present at the first half 
tufi (on the occasion of pause at the bdhya dvddatdnta) and the last 
half (on the occasion of pause at antab doddaidnta)^ it cannot 
be limited by time. Therefore, it is without beginning or end. 

Leaving aside these two half tufisy the aspirant should practise 
the dissolution of the kaldSy by meditating on the somdtiiia i.e. on 
visarga kald {ah) without and *au^ within the remainmg tufisf 
separating it within himself in the form of the seventeenth btndu* 
kald.^ 

All these three explanations should be considered to be appro¬ 
priate. This verse is a Sutra. Therefore, by turning its words 
this way or that way, many kinds of explanations would become 
quite fit, as has been said that ‘a Sutra is that which gives scope 
for manifold senses.’ The respected teachers have s^Verred that 
Paratiisika is an unsurpassable Sutra. In this way, tlWe can be 
many interpretations of the earlier yerses also which aSfe indeed 
like Sutras. 


Notes 

1. Tufi : tufi is that time in which the breath covers 2i fingers. 

2. The seventeenth bindukald is that where the movement of 
both prdna and apdna ceases. 



268 


Para-TriHka- Vivarana 


3. The bahya-dvddaAanta is called the ^ddi-koti\ and the antah- 
dvdda^dnta is called the ^anta-kotV, Practice of meditation on these 
two spots is called ^ddyanta-koti~nibhdlana\ 

Commentary 

kim itthaniabhydse sati bkavati? itydha 

What happens by means of the practice of t\i\syoga? Inan swer 
to this query, the author says: 


Text of the Verse 

yAn yan kAmayate KAMAMS 

TANSTAfi CHHiGHRAM AVAPNUYAT / 

ASMAT pratyaksatAm eti 

SARVAJSaTVAM NA SAMSAYAH II 36 II 

Translation of the text 

^^The yogi obtains immediately whatever objects he desires. 

erefore, omniscience becomes as direct to him as perception; 
there is no doubt about this. 


Text of the Commentary 

From evam abhyisat upto dehena iti on p. 102, 1. 15 to 18. 

Translation of the Commentary 

of endeavour, perseverance, eagerness, 
firmness of will brought about by the potency 
Utn i 2,rious sauh mantra {sarvamaya hxdaya-virya-samuccha- 

nf ^ ^^Ta) and so by repetition of the continuous state 
e_>;o^a {tatsthiturudhi-rupa-abhydsdt), he acquires so much 
^ obtains immediately whatever he desires. In 
o , in t s very physical body, he acquires omniscience that is 
characteristic of the Supreme Bhairava. 36. 

Concluding portion 

From sanamuktvd upasanihriyate on p. 102, 1. 18 upto so yamu- 
pasarrihara on the same page, 1. 19. 


Abhinavagupta 


269 


Translation of the commentary 

After examining from all points of view, the book is now being 
concluded. In the end, the progress of the yogi terminates in the 
attainment of this transcendental state {akula-sattd-asddane) which 
means resting in one’s essenti^ Self; this alone is the state of 
Bhairava. This has been mentioned repeatedly. Now this is the 
concluding verse. 

Text of the Verse 

EVAM MANTRA-PHALAVAPTIR. 

ITY ETAD RUDRAYAMALAM / 

ETAD ABHYASATAH SIDDHIH 

SARVAjfSfATVA^ AVAPYATE // 37 // 

Translation 

Such is the gain from the practice of this mantra (viz. 
hfdayahija orsauh^). This betokens the union {ydmala) of Rudra and 
Rudra or Siva and Sakti. By the continuous practice of this is 
acquired the supernormal power of omniscience. 

Commentary 

From mantrdndm upto iti Hvam on p. 103, 1. 1 to 6. 

Translation of the Commentary 

In this way, the fruit of all mantras^ even of the mantras with 
t^ phonemes of the other Sastras also, is obtained, not otherwise. 
The word connotes conclusion. 

In conclusion, it is said that this connotes the union of Rudra 
and Rudra (Rudrayamala) i.e. of Siva and Sakti where there is 
no division of question and answer, which is the state of awareness 
of the essential Self {svarupa-amartana). 

Beginning from a consideration of this up to the external state 
in which there are infinite, innumerable cases of manifestation and 
absorption—all this is indeed summarized in akula or anuttara, 
the transcendental Reality. This is the conclusion (of the dialogue 
between Bhairava and Devi.) from the point of view of intuitive 
gnosis {prasarrikhydna). 



270 


Pard-TriHka-'Vivarana 


“From the practice of this accrues the power of omniscience”— 
this is the conclusion from the point of view of yoga. 

This (i.e. Rudrayamala state) is ever-present in everybody. 
May there be good to all! 


Notes 

The whole book may be regarded as a complete five-membered 
syllogism according to Nyaya-Sastra. The first verse, viz. ^^anu~ 
ttaram katham deva...vrajet^^ is the pratijna or introduction of the 
topic. The intervening verses constitute the (logical reason), 
uddharana (example) and upanaya (application). The 35th and 
36th verses constitute the nigamana (conclusion). 

AUTOBIOGRAPHICAL VERSES OF ABHINAVAGUPTA 

Thus being born of Cukhulaka, resident of Kashmir, I, a black 
bee at the lotus-feet of Mahesvara, intent on lifting up mankind 
looking upto me (for spiritual succour), have written this com¬ 
mentary pregnantwith the deliberation ofthe mystery ofTrika.( 1) 

Who can estimate emphatically that so much only is the doct¬ 
rine pertaining to Siva? There is no bar to words in this matter. 
All that which is within my comprehension appears here regarding 
the Universal Spirit {akhildtmani), Therefore, the wise should not 
be averse to it. (2) 

This is a work of such nature that it makes firm the knowledge 
of the ignorant, of one who is full of doubts or of one who has 
contrary views. In the case of those in whom conviction has al¬ 
ready started, in whom it is fully grown {rudhasya), it makes the 
settled conviction of their heart harmonize with its teaching. (3) 

In Kashmir, there was the chief minister ofthe king, Yasaskara. 
He was named Vallabhacarya. He was a Brahmin of the most 
excellent lineage. His son, Sauri is worthy of renown on 
account of all liis good qualities and is like the ocean in dedica¬ 
tion to the feet of the crescent-crested Siva, is the abode of virtue, 
one who fully deserves the great fame that has spread about him, 
is a pleasant object of affection and who has an inborn tendency 
towards compassion on all people. 

His life-companion (wife) is named Vatsalika. Because of the 
abounding devotion to her husband, her mind is filled with an 


Abhinavagupta 


271 


inner disposition towards spiritual matters and expands with 
delight by the worship of Siva. (4-5) 

He has a son, named Karna who is a Brahmin who very well 
understands the mystery of the manifestation and maintenance of 
the world, who delights in the meditation and reflection on and 
worship of Siva, who even in boyhood and youth, abandoning 
attachment to objects of sense, has resorted to unwavering 
reflection which eradicates transmigratory existence. (6) 

My own brother by name Manoratha Gupta, having a longing 
for the Supreme Self, is engrossed in the Saiva Sastras, who, in 
order to destroy transmigratory existence, is eager to examine the 
entire range of Sastras and Tantras in order to attain the supreme 
status of Siva. (7) 

There is also another person, Ramadeva by name, who is devoted 
to Saiva Sastras, who is well-versed in grammar {pada)^ Mimamsa 
{vdkya) and Nyaya {pramdna)^ nd who brings about veritable 
adornment to his birth in the highest caste (i.e. Brahmana). (8) 
May that which I have written with heart full for the good and 
delight of all these serve as a guide for all for the attainment of 
(the nature of) Siva. (9) 

Atrigupta who was born in an excellent family in Antarvedi 
(the land between Gahga and Yamuna) came (to settle down in) 
Kashmir the borders of which were hallowed by innumerable 
sages who were the incarnations of moon-crested Siva. (10) 

In his great lineage was born Varahagupta whose son was 
Cukhula by name who was averse to worldly affairs and whose 
heart was set on Siva alone. (11) 

From him who had examined and understood the entire lot of 
categories and principles did obtain Abhinavagupta the human 
body sanctified by the Supreme Lord. (Even in this embodied con¬ 
dition ), having obtained full freedom from care and doubt, he has 
instilled into the hearts of his pupils the secret lore of Trika. (12) 
To those who are devoid of right judgement, I can only make a 
bow. There are others who deliberate but are unable to reach a 
successful conclusion. One can but pity these senseless people. 
There may be someone else, though only one among a lakh (a 
hundred thousand) who has become steady in mind after having 
attained the quintessence of deep deliberation. The above may 
bring my effort to a successful issue. (13) 


272 


Para- Trrnka- Vimrana 


Any earnest request to those who are lazy in discerning their 
Self will not bear any fruit other than harrying oneself. There are 
those of unsteady mind who only make a fuss regarding the dis¬ 
cernment of the universe. I only bow my head in respect to 
appease them. (14) 

There are dull-witted people who are confused themselves and 
throw the senseless multitude of creatures into confusion. Having 
bound them fast with fetters, they bring them under their subjection 
by influencing them with tall talk of their qualities. Having thus 
seen creatures who are simply carriers of the burden oi gurus and 
their (bUnd) followers, I have prepared a trident of wisdom in 
order to cut asunder their bondage. (15) 

I was also thrown into confusion by many who presumed to be 
teachers of truth by declaring ‘that (Brahma of Siva) am I’ but 
whose tongue had not even contacted the two words Hhat’ and 
thou {tat tvam varnayugamapi), (16) 

he hs-s set in motion the heart of the guru with com- 

those who have taken refuge (at his feet), 
hat glorious guru has set me on the path of truth. (17) 

'^"^tten this work after (fully) reflecting on the doctrine 
shares ZZ ^ ^ spontaneously entered my heart which 

lavishfv f streams of ardent delight rushing forth 

hrdavaU ^^domain of 

mind sneerh cutting asunder crores of my fetters, my 

Sgratorv exi T reawakening of the fear of 

you, therefore^ already surrendered at your feet. May 

and dwell in Ch^rlarG T and quickly, 

O HH ^ G^race abounding. (19) 

existence in your beautiful and ingenious continued 

it is vl th (tatcafcra), assigning the position of a 

Therefore f ' ° employed me in the act of exposition etc. 

In ninet capriciousness of my speech and mind. (20) 

exnrained T. Paratrisika has been 

Trika *^5 t asunder the knots of doubts in all the 

Tnka Sastra. This ha, been written by Abhinavagupta, 

The commentary on Paratrisika is completed. 


GENERAL INDEX 


fl, first letter of devanagari script, 13, 
15,24,25,30,33,36, 46, 54-56,60, 
64, 78, 87-91, 96, 98, 144, 166, 190, 
192, 211, 216, 225, 226, 241, 242, 
265. 

abhedOf unity, 30. 
abhidhana, designation, 19. 
abhidheya, subject -matter, 17-19. 
abhijity 29. 

Abhinavaguptay 2, 4-7, 16, 19, 20, 25, 
30,31, 35,37,38,46-53, 55, 56, 58, 
60,63,70,75,80-82,85,92, 93, 97, 
98, 136-138, 141, 144, 147, 152, 
153, 160, 173, 186, 191-193, 205, 
207-209, 211, 216, 220, 227-229, 
231, 233, 238, 240, 270-272. 
absolute {akidoi anuttara), 44, 46, 50, 

79, 144, 165,257,261. 
absorption', {samdveia)y 13. 
deary ay teacher; 81. 
action, 25, 31,40, 140, 156. 

activity {kriyd)y 2, 9, 17, 18, 24, 27, 64, 

80, 81, 91, 99, 134, 159, 165, 169, 
174-175, 194, 208, 251. 

adhikdriy a competent person, 19. 
adivyay a particular relationship, 14. 
ddi-ydgay sexual intercourse of vira and 
yoginiy 210. 

adfstay unseen, 233, 236. 
advaitay non-dualistic, 4, 100. 
Advayasampattivartika, 183. 

Agama, 83, 85, 90, 105, 109, 110, 124, 
169, 190, 195, 201,204. 

Aghora, 17, 23, 193, 200, 208, 246, 251. 
fire 88,131,138, 144, 175, 198, 
251. 

agnihotray sacrificial libation, 250. 
agnikdryoy oblation in the sacrificial 
fire, 258. 

aharriy I, 13, 24, 30, 36, 47, 54, 55, 60, 
62, 67, 78, 127, 131, 142, 177, 180, 
182, 190, 194, 195, 255. 
a-ha-may 55, 56, 78, 79, 127, 182, 236. 
aharjibhdvay I-feeling, 55, 70. 
aharjivimariay I-feeling, creative I- 
consciousness of Siva, 140, 141, 186. 
aharrikdray (ego), 27, 89, 98, 109, 115, 
117, 126, 128-130, 144, 148, 220, 
232. 

aindriy one of the matrkas, 208. 
aiivaryay sovereignty, 67, 232. 
AJaeJapramatrsiddhi, 55, 182. 


ajMnay ignorance, 57, 60, 96, 97. 
dkdray form, 29. 

aA'aia, void, 25, 88, 128,130, 132, 142, 
145,214, 251. 
akramay successionless, 64. 
ak^ahrimy a sacred syllable, 246, 251. 
dksepOy gradual dissolution, 115. 
akulay the Absolute, 44, 62, 77, 80, 81, 
84, 90, 161, 162, 171, 191, 213, 216, 
229, 230, 240, 269. 
amdy the changeless one, 57, 58. 
amdkaldy 174, 187, 197. 

Amard^a, 4. 

ambrosial seeds, four phonemes, viz., 
r r 11» 135. 

amfta (kundalini), 263, 267. 
amfta-amiay the 16th kala, 265. 
amfta-bljay the phonemes, r r I 1, 137- 
139, 151, 203, 204, 210, 223, 224, 
226, 228, 229, 231, 243, 266, 267. 
amftakaldy 174, 184, 211. 
amftavarrjiay 189. 

anadyatanoy Ian i.e. imperfect, 12. 
andkhyay the nameless one, 3. 
dnandoy bliss, 2, 31, 98, 139, 

168, 169, 175, 182, 184, 211-214, 
218,219,251. . 

dnanda iaktiy the energy of bliss, 17, 144, 
148, 175, 205, 216. 
anantOy the phoneme j, 242. _ 
Anantabhattaraka, 17, 47, 65,101 >200. 
andhita Uva, 20, 21, 25, 28, 66, 76, 77, 
84, 102, 108, 109,121,128, 163,16a, 
166, 172, 241. 

the sphere, 167, 204. 

Andhra, 74. 

androgynous, 46, 51. 

ahga (himba)y 251. 

atiimdy power, 34, 36. 

answer, see question-answer. 

antardvddaJdnta the internal 

where prd^ia ceases to move, 29, 1 “b, 
267, 268. 

antardla, a kind of relationship, 1^* . 

Antarv^i, the land between Gafiga 
and Yamuna 271. ^ oa qq 

a( 2 w, the empirical individual, 24, Vro, 
243. . . ,, 

anubandha cafttsfayay four indispensable 
elements of any sastra, 19. 
anugraha, grace, 9, 29, 134. 
anugrahdtmikdy grace incarnate, 10. 


274 


Pard-TriSikd-Vivarana 


a.iusandhdna, unification, 70,98. 
anuwara, the 15th syllable of the vowel, 
30,36,60, 78,87, 190,191, 217. 
muttara, the Supreme Reality, 2, 3, 5, 
6, 14-16, 18, 20-27, 30, 31, 34, 
36-39, 42,44,46-33,55,59, 61, 64, 
65,76-87, 89-91, 97, 98, 100, 124, 
131, 134, 136, 144, 14/, 159-162, 
164-166, 168, 171-173, 173, 181- 
183, 187-191, 195, 197, 150, 201, 
207, 211, 213, 215,216, 218, 219, 
224, 228, 229, 236, 245, 256-258, 
261,265,269. 


oniaya^ positive proof, 35, 36. 
apdnay the ingoing breath, 23, 29, 44, 
126,217,263-265,267. ’ 

apdnacara^ breath entering within, 196. 
197,264. ’ 


cpara^ the last stage of manifestation, 60, 
86,108,147,154,159. 
apoh^, the experience of gap between 
™ o?i ®^P®*^ence and its recall. 


4iprasara, non-expansion, 163,164. 
pervasion, 124. 

^pyayiniy the energy that pervades unto 
jalatattva, 124. ^ 

arapi, a piece of wood for kindling 
sacnficial fire, 258. ^ 

■ardh^andra, the fifth mdtrd of om, 125, 
178, 186. 

arthakriyd, purpose, 80. 
articulation, 155. 

Atrigupta, 271. 
aum, 104, 255. 

cvabodha, realization, 57. 
cvakdJadd, the giver of space 124. 
dvartana, repeUtion, 246,247. 
aoatdra, descent, 123. 
avikalpay thought free, 7. 
avindbhdvi^ inherent, 22, 28. 


bahy^uadaianta, the external spac 
ceases to move 29,196 

bandhcL, bondage, 35, 

Bafuka, 260. 

Bhadrakdll, 265, 266. 
bhaga^ 66, 67. 

Bhagavadgita, 45, 71, 211, 242, 254. 
Bhairava, 5, 6, 10,13-16, 18-22. 24 
32,34,36,39,40,42,44, 46-48, 50 
3l, 55, 63, 64, 70, 75-85, 91, 96 
98, 108, 111-114, 117-120, 128 


156-164, 168, 169, 171, 182, 196, 
203-207, 212, 213, 215-218, 220- 
222, 224, 226, 228, 231, 238, 245, 
251,258. 261,268,269. 

Bhairavabila, 21. 

Bhairavamarga, 81. 

Bhairavasastra, see Sastra. 
Bhairavatantra, 196. 

Bhairavi, the Divine Energy, 11, 176, 
194. 

bh4iktiy devotion, 256, 257, 

Bhargas'ikha, 222. 

Bhartrhari, 100, 225. 
bhdsandy manifestion, 110. 
Bhattadhanesvarasarma, 264. 
Bhattanarayaija, 67, 188. 
bhdva, entities, 39, 41. 
bhdvand, contemplation, 22, 34, 37, 38, 
44, 149, 234. 

bheda, diversity, 30, 115, 243. 
bfuddbhedoy unity in diversity, 30, 243. 
bheda saqikhyay vowelless letters, 153. 
bhogay enjoyment, 122, 191. 

^ objective existents, 

38, 39, 50. 

bhuvanay sphere, 150, 241,261. 

the seed syllable, 89, 98, 122, 149, 

262,263’ 

bjjcmantray sacred seed syllable, 204. 
bijdvasthdpanay one of the aspects of 
creative activity, 19. 
bimba, refiection, 83, 85, 108, 118,121, 
125, 127, 151, 173. 

bimba^pratibimbay origin and refiection, 
.119,128,131. 
bimbapratibimbavada, 109. 
bindu, the 15th vowel, a dot, 36. 60, 
\25, 152, 153, 167, 168, 172, 173, 
,. 181; 182, 187, 197, 217, 264. 
bmdu-kala, am,2\&, 264, 267. 
bindu-Sakli, Siva’s sakti, 148. 

2, 24, 31,32, 42-45,50, 
62-64, 67, 90, 98, 136, 139, 163, 
169,205,206,251. 

bodha^ Universal Divine Consciousness, 
7,71,175. 

bod^maya, consisting of Conscionsness 

bodhini, illuminating, 124. 

Bodhisattva, 29. 

body UarUa), 5-7, 12, 18, 21, 24, 31, 
33,34,36,37,42-44,52, 57, 61, 71- 
72, 95, 123, 128, 149, 165, 207, 218, 
221, 227, 234, 236, 239, 241, 
240,246,252,268, 271. 
bondage (bandha), 4, 18, 21, 31, 35, 73, 
119,154,156,159. 


General Index 


275 


bralima,2\, 38, 45, 50, 87, 102, 116, 
191, 203, 205, 207, 210, 212-218, 
220, 221, 223, 241, 242, 251. 

brahmapancakay 8/, 89, 191. 

brahmaramihra, 235. 

Brahma, 11, 12, 62, 109, 154, 158, 
256,257. 

brahmanay 23, 223. 

brahmiy one of the matrkas, 62, 158, 
170,208. 

breath {prciiia)y 12, 24, 29, 31, 206, 
208, 217, 264, 266. 

buddhiy intellect, 21, 27, 61, 66, 89, 98, 
109, 115, 117, 126-130, 136, 138, 
140, 144, 148, 200, 208, 220, 232. 

Buddhism, 29, 57. 

Buddhists, 74. 


cakrcy vortices of energy, 21, 32, 150, 
234. 

CakrUy devatdy 238. 

cakray kuluy 179. 

cakray mariciy 46. 

cakray mdtrkdy 135, 136, 150. 

cakray mulddhdray 266. 

cakray raJmiy 36. 

cakray Saktiy 36, 175, 179, 208, 209. 
cakray vijfldnay 42. 

cak^Uy the eyes, 89, 129, 130, 144, 148. 
camatkdray amazement, wonder of bliss, 
24, 112, 190. 

cdmu(i^, one of the matrkas, 170, 208. 
carvaijLdy perceptive experience with 
delight, one of the four aspects of 
manifestations, 17, 19, 189,197, 198. 
carydy observance of religious rites, in 
the context of cohabitation between 
the vlra and 85,236,238. 

Carydkramay 221 . 
castes {jdti)y 223, 226, 238. 
categories, thirty six {addhvd) , 66, 

77, 87, 116, 119, 120, 134, 150, 212, 
213, 214, 217, 244, 245, 250, 261. 
ciddnanduy Consciousness bliss, 54, 169. 
city consciousness, 2, 6, 38,72, 98, 168, 
175, 218, 251. 

cit pramdtdy experient of the void, li¬ 
cit Jaktiy consciousness power, 17. 
cittay intellect, 35, 77. 
consciousness, 3, 4, 14, 23, 24, 31, 34, 
35, 37, 53, 61, 66, 71, 72, 78, 80, 
93-95, 98, 99, 111, 113, 115, 128, 
156, 158, 164, 165, 169, 183, 187, 
204, 207, 210, 213, 218, 227, 228, 
233, 251, 255, 257, 259, 261. 
consciousness, I, 5, 8, 9, 15, 18-20, 
24, 25, 30, 35, 42, 44, 45, 47, 55- 


57, 63, 71, 74, 77, 78, 90, 92, 98, 
110, 111, 115, 117, 135-138, 

141, 147, 161, 162, 174, 177, 180, 
182, 183, 186, 190, 195, 236, 

245, 258, 262, 266. 

Consciousness, supreme, divine, 2, 
3, 5, 7, 9, 10, 16, 18, 20-22, 25, 
33-37, 40, 47, 49-51, 53, 60, 
63, 77, 81, 91, 95, 96, 110, 114, 
1 16,119, 120, 123, 135, 138, 180, 
184, 194, 196, 199. 

Consciousness, transcendental, 118. 
Consciousness, universal, 6, 29, 50, 
66, 71, 86, 111. 

Consciousness power, 6. 
consonants {vyahjana)y 81 y 88, 122, 
123, 137, 141, 149-153, 174, 175, 
187, 192, 195, 212, 214, 216, 217, 
219, 220.^ 

contemplation {bhdvand)y 34, 37, 234, 
261. 

continuity {avicchinnatd)y 9, 10. 
cosmos {vih'a)y 24, 37, 88, 236. 
creativity {visargaparaina)y 14. 
Cukhulaka, 270, 271. 


Daksa, 85. 

darianay experience, 231, 234. 
dehay body, 6, 24, 77. 

dehay dtivdhikay 220 . 
dehapramdtdy experient of body, 77. 
deities {devatd)y 208, 209, 239, 246, 
256. 

deia space, 29. 
deva (deity), 31, 246. 

devatdy 11 . n<i 

devi, 3, 6, 9-12, 14, 15, 46, 47, 50, 63, 
65, 67, 70, 75, 84, 90, 97, 137, 201, 
238, 255, 269. 
devlypardy 207. 
deviy paratltdy 209. 
devotion (b/iakti), 206, 250. 
dhdraiidy concentration, 37, o/, o^, JOy 
100, 179,235. ^ ^ , 

dhdrikdy the energy which bears the 
earth, 124. 

righteoi^ness, 67. 
dhydnay meditation, 37, 179, 23o. 
diagram {maridala)y 236, 238. 
dikcarly the energy activating the outer 
senses, 38, 39, 50. 
diksdy initiation 238, 239, 245. 
disciple 202, 239. 

divine {divya), 2, 7, 20, 36, 

63, 68, '99, 117, 131, 151, 156, 161, 
190,199, 206, 242. 


276 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


divinity, 11, 54, 91, 154, 232. 
divya^ divine, 14. 
dravana, dissolution, 229-231. 
Dravidian, 74. 
dream {svapna), 229. 
dualism {dvaita), 23, 57 , 64. 
dualistic (dvaitavadin), 
dualists, 21 . 

Durvasas, 4 . 
dvaita, dualistic, 4 . 

dvaitadvaita, dualistic-cum non dual¬ 
istic, 4, 46. 

dvdrapujd, worship of Ganesa and 
Batuka at the door, 260. 


elements, {bhuta), 23, 27, 31, 41, 77 
223f25U 

empirical, 24. 

enduring state {dhnivapada), 15 
energy {iakti), 4, 5, 7-9, 13, 14, 16 
Ih ^*-45. 47, 49, 51, 52, 61, 67 ’ 

iH204'.2s|- 

ether (dkdJa), 25, 78, 79, 98. 
eunuch (napumsaka), 172. 
evolution, {vivarta), 134. 
exclusion {vyatireka),Z5. 
expansion {prasdra), 183. 
experients {pramdtd), 10, 14. 


five-fold-act (paficakrtya), 8, 9, 16 
form {dkrti), 29. ’ 

fourth stage (turya), 16. 
t^our states (avasthd ) 217. 

27, 31,34, 

0 ^, b 1,62, 66, 67, 72, 79, 80 94 I 
future 113 ’ ’ 


gandha (smell) 27, 39, 46, 47 89 
209 ‘32-139, 144, 

Ganes'a, 260. 

ghanatd, solidification, 5, 174, 175 

smell, *129 ’ 
144, 148. ’ 

gldni, ignorance, 97. 
gocart, the energy activating ir 
senses, 38, 39, 50. 
god (devatd), 105, 203, 
god’s will, 98, 108. 

^ 3, 5, 9, 15, 17, 46, 

62, 65, 68, 70, 71, 74, 87, 109, 


156, 158, 190, 206, 
256, 257, 266, 272. 


230, 250, 252, 


grace {anugraha), 6 , 8 , 9, 10, 14, 15, 18, 
20, 74, 92, 101, 108, 114, 119, 134, 
154, 158, 196, 212, 234, 238, 245, 
262,272. 


grammar (vjdkaraiia), 11 , 26, 75, 82, 
172, 2 /1. 


grasana, dissolution, 115, 265. 
grasana-yukti, process of dissolution, 
115,116,134. 

gross {sthula), 31, 34, 50, 53, 77, 154, 
155, 176. 


O-!• 

guhya, mystery, 53, 60, 263, 265. 
Guhyayoginitantra, 178. 
gutfa, quality, 219. 

gtmt, teacher, 4, 21, 23, 29, 34, 64, 74. 
80, 83, 150, 174, 185, 195, 204, 226, 

238 , 239 , 243 , 259 , 260 , 205 , 272 . 


na, the last letter of consonants, 13, 30, 
36, 54, 5.5, 60, 78. 

hamsa, breathing with the utterance of 
ham and sah, 23. 
hanisa-prapa, 28. 

hafha-paka, persistent process, 236. 
heart {hrdava), 1, 2, 21, 27, 45, 58, 61, 
63, 65, 78-80, 95, 118, 151, 203, 
204, 206, 207, 211, 214, 218, 221, 
222, 226, 227, 229, 238, 244, 253, 
256, 259-261, 266, 271, 272, 

heart-lotus {hrtpadma), 83, 114, 

262-264. 

homa, oblation, 149, 
homogeneousness (samald), 42, 52. 
hrdaya, heart, 1, 2, 21, 27, 45, 58, 61, 
63, 65, 78-80. 95, 118, 151, 203, 
ooo’ oS'’’ 26^’ 210-213, 217, 218, 
222, 233, 236, 253, 254, 256, 258, 
259, 261, 264, 265, 269, 272. 
hrdeyabija, 245, 250, 252, 254, 256, 
p8. 259, 261, 264, 265, 269, 272. 
hrdayajapay 266. 

hrtkarriikdi the centre of the heart lotus 
263-266. 


I, 12, 15, 24, 36, 47, 50, 55, 57, 60, 62, 
70, 78-80, 82, 99, 110, 127, 135, 
138, 142, 180, 194, 195. 
tccha, will, 2, 17, 59, 60, 98, 147, 159, 
162-168, 171-173, 175, 182, 212- 
• 216, 218, 219. 223, 227, 230, 241, 
251,252,254. 


General Index 


Til 


icchd sakti, energy of will, 17, 37, 63, 
77, 123, 124, 144, 152, 163, 169, 
171-173, 176, 212, 230, 242. 
idam, object, 142. 
individual {vjyasfi), 24. 
indrdiii, one of the matrkas, 170. 
indriya, sense organ, 31, 34, 46. 
indriyasakti, 235, 236. 
indriyavrtti, 235, 236. 
initiation {diksd), 23, 24, 29, 81, 90, 
212, 225, 238, 239, 244, 245, 258. 
intellect (biiddhi), 108, 117. 
intercourse, 206, 209, 210, 

Isana, 17, 214-216, 219, 246, 251. 

Udnabija, 137, 138, 140. 
isikd^ the power of Lordship, 17. 

Uitva^ Lordship. 9. 

Uvara, Lord, 9, 28, 89, 99, 101, 109, 
110, 115, 117, 121, 124, 125, 127- 
130, 141, 142, 144, 147, 148, 154, 
241,242,257. 

Isvarapratyabhijha, 27, 56. 
IsVarapratyabhijhatika, 186. 

Uvariy Supreme Divine Energy, 17. 


jagat, world, 164. 
jagaddnamla, universal bliss, 1, 67. 
jdgrat, waking state, 28. 
japa, repetition of sacred syllables, 69, 
70, 249, 266. 

jahy water, 128, 130, 131, 136, 148. 
Jayaratha, 1, 2,85. 

jihvdmillJya, sound uttered from the 
root of the tongue, 179, 186. 
jfvay the limited being, 28, 58, 64, 134, 
226. 

jwanmiikti, liberation while living 84, 
259. 

jfldnGy knowledge, 2, 9, 14, 24, 27, 30, 
57, 59, 60, 63, 67, 85, 99, 158, 159, 
162, 164, 165, 168, 173, 175, 208, 
211, 212, 218, 223, 231, 240, 241, 
251,254,258. 

jiidna, abheda, non-dual knowledge, 
235. 

jMna, bheda, knowledge of diversity, 

235. 

jiidna, indriya, 2, 18, 27, 98, 115, 128. 
jMnamudrd, internal spiritual union, 

209,212,230. 
jndnapratibhd, 94, 199. 
jiidna iakti, 14, 30, 56, 63, 77, 109, 123, 
124, 126, 152, 156, 162, 163, 167, 
169, 173, 176, 180, 207, 210, 213, 
214,229,235,242,252. 
jddtd, the knower, 30. 


jrieya, the object of knowledge, 16, 30. 
Kailasa, 17. 

kald, the power of Divine, 2, 24, 25, 41, 
46, 89, 98-102, 127, 129, 130, 144, 
148, 159, 160, 187, 188, 190, 194, 
197, 198, 210, 264, 265, 267. 
kdla, time, 29, 88, 89, 99, 100, 102, 117, 
127, 129, 144, 148, 183. 
kdldgni, die inidal bhuvana belonging 
to the earth category, 241. 
kdlasakti, the power of time, 27. 
kdli, a deity, 223. 
kalki, 113. 

Kallata, 92. • i o i ci 

kalpa, a fabulous period of time, l-^> 
kdma, desire, 41, 50, 51 210 , 216, 219. 
kdmatativa, 220. 
kdmavdki 219, 220. 
kaiicuka, sheath, V’cil, 89, 100, 115. 
kanda, the male organ, 263 , 265^, 2bb. 
karana, cause, 22, 34, 37, 155, 1/6, 234, 
236, 271. 

karana, antah, 8, 10, 38, 39, 126. 
karana, bdhya, 38. j qa 

karana-sarira, the causal body, 34-. 
karaiiesvari, the energy of sense organs, 

46. 

karma, activity, 16, 29. 

karma, indriya, 18, 27, 98, Ho, i*-®* 

kdrya, action 16. 

Kashmir, 37, 105, 270, 271. 
Kathopanisad, 69. 

kaula, Siva, 4, 62, 85. ,„^;vprsal 

kaulamdrga, the path qj. 

unity, of consciousness oZ, oa. 

kaula idstra, 259. c c cia 77 

kaidika, pertaining to kula, 5, o, > » 

81, 83,84. 

kaidika iakti, 191. r-j 

kaidika siddhi, achievement of identity 
of limited consciousness with per 
feet I-consciousness, o-7, Oi’O , 

35, 46, 47, 49, 50, 97. 
kaidika srsfi, 97. ^ o=. 

kaulika vidhi, 77, 78, 80, 81, 83, 8o, 

kaumart, one of the mdirkas, 170, 208. 
kha, void, 5, 50. 

khecarl, unobstructed on? WQ 226 

5-7, 38, 39, 50, 52,195, 201, 209. 226. 

khecari sdmya or samati, 

kkecari/l, 38, 41,43, 44 46, 47, 
50-53, 195, 196, 201, 209. 
khecari Sakti, 42, 52, 195. 
khecari vaisamya, disparateness 
khecari, 40, 51, 52, 125. 
Kiranagama, 240. 


278 


Para-TrUikd- Vivarana 


knowledge,i/iana, 9, 11, 17, 24, 30, 38, 
52, 54, 56, 57, 61, 63, 67, 75, 79, 
83, 94, 99, no. 111 , 140, 159, 162, 
164, 169, 175, 177-179, 183, 192- 
194, 197, 208, 214, 217, 219, 223, 
225,232,240,242,243,251. 
knowledge, determinate, 180. 
knowledge, divine, 54. 
knowledge, indeternunate, 158. 
Kramakeli, 223. 
kramapujd, 259-261. 

Kramastotra, 223. 

24. 39, 60, 85, 
99, la9, 16o, 168, 175, 208,212,214 
218,223,240,241,251,252,254. 

knya mudra^ 209. 

kriya Jakii, 17, 27, 30, 63, 73, 77, 79 
^21,’123, ik, ’148, 
lo2, 160, 161, 165, 167, 172 173 
207, 212 : 214: 22^ 229! 

krodha, anger, 41, 50, 51. 
krtya, 40, 46. 
k^attriya, 23. 

Ksemaraja, 266. 

3. 15, 17, 44, 159, 
Kubjikamata, 176. 

50, 61, 62 65 

WaZiA^S’uO.^^’ ^201,236.’ 
fjula cakra, see cakra. 
kula deha, 149. 

^ula mdrga, 81. 
kula-purusa, 149-151, 153. 

149-151, 153, 161, 162. 

kuU iastra, 244, 260, 261 
f^ulakuldtma, 84. 
kulandyikd, 61 . 

kuleivari, 104. 
kulottara, 151. 

^mda-golaka, 210, 221, 255 
K-tmdahnl, 55, 60, 78, 209. 
kuridalini-iakti, 263. 

ku^af2m’ ^36, 265. 

kutabija, the letter ksa, 187. 

Laghavi-vrtti,6,7,49, 53, 58, 207-209, 

laghima, 36. 

Laksmirama, 209. 
language, 74, 75, 155, 171. 
letter, 40, 41, 48, 89, 91, 96-98, 101 
102, 120-123, 128, 137, 149, 150 
154, 155, 159, 177, 183, 186, 187’ 
250, 254, 257. 


liberation, 18-21,23, 24, 28, 29, 33, 34, 
41,42, 52, 53, 84, 122, 123, 134, 195, 
203, 224, 226, 227, 233, 244, 259, 

life, 11, 15, 24, 31, 42, 52, 53, 56, 169, 
195. 

light, 9, 24, 31, 32, 34-36, 38, 48, 50, 
54, 57, 71, 80, 8,5, 98, 111, 112, 117, 
131, 136, 138, 169, 260, 262, 263. 
lingo, 249, 253. 

/o/rt/iaca, oscillation, 121. 

Lord, 4, 8, 10, 11,14,15,20,22, 27, 34, 
40, 48, 53, 56, 58, 61, 67, 74, 78-80, 
83, 84, 90, 96, 97, 99, 105, 114, 116, 
118, 121, 140, 157, 158, 161-163, 
168, 174, 177, 184, 186, 193, 202, 
207, 229, 233, 234, 243, 257, 260, 


ma, 25th letter of consonants, 11,54. 
macrocosmic, 6, 7, 51. 
ma^iyadhama, the central path, su^umna, 

madhyamd, a. vdk, 8, 9, 11-16, 28,47, 
48, 63, 79, 80,84, 109, 111, 118, 121, 
122, 125, 128, 149, 154-157, 159, 
1/1, 176, 177, 183, 253. 
madhyanddi, sufwnnd, 208. 
madird, wine, 85. 

13, 14, 54, 55, 60 , 63, 67, 78, 

182. 

Mahabharata, 86. 
mdhdmdyd, 101, 127, 130, 14^, H8. 
mahdmantra, 178. 
mahdpreta, Sadasiva, 125. 
mahdsrsti, great creation, from andirita 
to iuddhavidyd, 77, 84, 163, 171. 
mahat, 14, 66. 
mahdvidya, 54. 
maheidnf, 250. 
maheivara, 39, 270. 
maheivari, 170, 208. 
mahimd, 36. 

maithuna, sexual intercourse, 85. 
mala, impurity, 2,21,84, 96, 101,242. 

209 ^’ 

mal^^^dnna, 2, 40, 96, 97, 101, 195, 

mala^mdyfya, 2, 39, 96, 97, 101, 195, 

Mdlini, i02, 104, 121, 123, 129, 135, 
142, 144, 147, 149-154, 159,' 226, 
246. 

mdlini, anuttara^ 151. 
mdlini, purva, 1.37. 
mdlini, uttara, 137. 


General Index 


279 


Malinivijaya Taiitra, 74,96, 98, 101, 
102, 104, 108, 109, 121-123, 125, 
129, 149, 154, 160, 166, 193, 195, 
196, 225, 226, 234, 235, 253. 
marnsay meat, 85. 
manay measure, 57. 

manasy mind, 27, 49, 89, 98, 109, 115, 
117, 126, 128-130, 144, 148, 220, 
232. 

rmm^alay sacred diagram, 236, 238. 
manifestation, 1, 3, 7, 17, 25, 34, 37,44, 
46,48, 50, 54, 55, 58-62, 73, 75, 77, 
79, 84-90, 96-98, 111, 112, 114, 
115, 119, 124, 126, 128, 131, 134, 
136, 147, 162, 163, 165, 166, 168, 
169, 171, 173, 174, 181, 183-186, 
189-192, 197-199, 201, 213, 214, 
219, 224, 235, 253, 262, 263, 266, 
269, 271. 

Manorathagupta, 271. 
mantroy sacred syllables, 8-10, 14, 23, 
33,42,44-46,'54,62, 63, 68, 70, 87, 
89, 91, 101, 102, 121, 123, 124, 
149-154, 156, 173, 177, 178, 180, 
192, 193, 199, 203-205, 207, 208, 
222, 223, 225, 226-228, 233-235, 
238-241, 243, 245-256, 258, 259, 
261,263, 269. 
njanlra, gqyatrfy 255. 
mantray mdlinfy 251. 
tnantruy mdlrkd, 251. 
mantray navdlmoy nine syllable mantra 
1.53, 208. 

mantra, pardparay 170. 
mantra, sank, 203, 204, 207, 233, 243, 
244, 248, 255, 264, 268. 
mantramahrsvara, 10, 68, 101, 110, 153, 
1.54, IGO, 177, 20.5, 238. 
mantresvara, 10, 23, 101, 154, 177, 238. 
mdraria, killing a pei*son by the applica¬ 
tion of the mantra, 40, 46. 
manna, measure of fingers, 221. 

Mata, 85. 
mdtrdy 37, 125, 126. 

mdtrkd, 104, 130, 131, 134, 135, 137, 
139-142, 144, 147, 149-152, 177- 
179, 183, 192, 194, 195, 198, 226, 
246. 

Matrkajnanabhcda, 179. 
matrkasadbhava, 104. 
matsyay fish 85. 

matsyodari, the belly of the fish, 25, 30> 
190. 

rndva, 12, 18, 24, 28, 34, 38, 40, 53, 54, 
58-60, 63, 75, 79, 84, 89, 98, 100- 
102, 104, 110-112, 11.5, 117, 122, 
124, 129, 130, 139, 140, 144, 147, 
148, 151, 176, 181, 192-195, 198, 


205, 223, 225, 226, 233, 234, 238- 
240, 242, 245. 

mdydpramdtdy the experient dominated 
by mdyd, 115. 

mdyiya, 48, 77, 111, 180, 183,195. 

mdyiydatida, 104,124,167, 204. 
meditation, 235, 236, 260, 261, 263, 


266,268,271. 

memory, {smrti), 8,11, 42,45,93, 229, 
231,234. 
microcosmic 51. 

Mimatnsa, 271. 

mind, 17, 33, 39, 40, 42, 53, 63, 9/ 
153, 206, 222, 272, (also manas), 
mindfulness, 208. 
moha, delusion, 51. 
moksa, 2\y2X 122,204. 
moment {ksam), 32,44, 64, 196. 
mothers (matrka’s), 208. 
mudrdy food of parched grain; symbolic 
postures, 85, 203, 207, 208, 210, 226, 
227, 228. . . 

mudrdy jndna, see jnana mudra, 
kdkaca fiatpAta, 263,264. 
mudrdy krama, 266. 
mudrdy kriyd, see kriyd, 
mudrdy ^atkoiia, 210. 

mudrdy trikonay2\Q. . , . 

muharta, the duration of forty eignt 
minutes, 203, 208, 228. 
muktiy liberation, 19, 20. 
Mukufasamhita, 223. 
mtdddhdra, 265, 266. 


nad y sound, a form of Saddsiva, 90,109, 
125, 135, 138, 139, 186. . 
nada, apara, 151. 
nadaypara, 97, 150, 151. 
ndda, pardpara, 151. 
ndddnta, 109, 125, 186. 


nadayoga, 178. ^ 

[andakum’ira, 17. 
fandl, 17. r o-i 

%phahrlniy a mfl/i/m, 246. -M. 
ara, the empincal bemg^ Uo qo ’ 

54, 55, 59, 62, 70, 72-75, 78, 82, 8o, 
123, 159, 182, 204, 205,211,228. 
larasimhagupta, 2. 

thecpnsort, 61. 

irdbhdsa, ever shining but beyond all 
appearances, 25. 

Irodha, stoppage, 32. 

Irodhiy 125. 

Irvdmi liberation, 244. 
iwaiiadiksdy initiation for the achieve¬ 
ment of liberation, 244. 



280 


Para- 'Trisikd- Vivarana 


nirvikalpa, thought-free 8, Ij 22 41 
66, 98, i 10, 111, 164, |80, ’244’, 29J 
nirvikalpajiiana, indeterminate know¬ 
ledge, 158. 

nirvikalpa sarnvid, indeterminate con¬ 
sciousness, 92, 93, 98. 
nisedha, restriction, 85. 
niskala, without parts, 23, 29. 
nityananda, 206. 

Nityatantra, 150. 
nivrlti, abstention, 169. 
niyati, 89, 99, 100, 102, 127, 129 144 
148. ’ ’ 

niyatiJaktiy 151. 
nondualism ( advaita ), 62 
nyasa, fixation, 123, 128, 149, 245, 246 
2ol, 2o8. 

Nyaya, 271. 

objectivity {jmyatva), 21, 25, 31 32 
98, 110, 111, 142, 147, 162, 163,264 
ojasy vital lustre, 42, 47, 52. 
omniscience [sorvajiiatd) 268-270 
om-tat-saty 242. 

Paday sentence, 98, 121 271 
pada, feet, 89, 129, 131, 144,'l48 
Padarthapravesanirnaya, 158. 

^°mentet23”34 ele- 

five-faced one 2 
Paneika, 121. ’ ‘ 

pam, hands, 89, 129, 131, 144, 148 
paray transcendent, 23, 31 84 85 fin 
J|. 86, 104, ,08', 139, 

Energy, 4 11 

04 ’ 60, 67 76' 7 q' 

68, 71, 75, 79, 119, 125 137 i 5 q’ 
163, 171, 198, 206, 209, "Mo 2?!’ 
227,233,234,266. ’^*2, 

pard-sajjivid,9,9G,\\Q \\^ loi ,o, 

^ 138,155, 159,^7,259,261 ^^^’ 

_l8’S:,‘gi'«l' 

Pardbhafldrikdy the supreme Roddes 45 
69,120,161. ’ 

paramdrthay the highest reality, 81. 
Parameivaray the highest Lord, 84.' 
pardpara, 60, 86, 108, 139, 141* 142 
154,159,231. ’ 

pard-paAyantiy 150-151. 


Paratrisika, 16, 18, 20, 37, 45, 56, 80, 
82,83, 104, 105, 205, 267, 272. 
Paratrisikavivarana, 24, 109, 207, 240. 
parindmavdday 174. 
pariirttiy turning round, 35. 
parvay festival, 260. 

Jiniited experient, 40, 100, 205, 
233. 

paiyantly an aspect of vdky 6, 8, 9-16 23 
28, 47, -18, .->6, 63, 64, 76, 79,’ 8o! 

118-121, 123, 125, 
126. 128. 139, 142, 149, 1,56, 1.57 
139, 171, 177, 183. 

Patanjali, 3.5, i6(., 1,8, 233. 
patiy the Lord, 233. 

pavitrakdy garlands with specific length 
and knots, 2ro, 26 i. 

pavitriy the purifying elements pervad¬ 
ing upto Vayu, 124. 
partly rectum, 89, 129, 131, 144, 1-18 
peace {Jdn(i)y 226. 

person (grammatical), {pimtsa)y 

/0-/O. 

phonemes (vnnia), 924 2^5 997 

232, 242, 254,-255, 2^65:269 ’ ’ 

pidhdnay veiling, 19. 
pinddy the body, 180. 
piridamantray 123, 128. 

Pindanatha, 236. 
pifhay the scat of energy, 41 
play {kridd)y 19, 40. 
plenitude, 206. 

96, 153, 

187, 194. 

{kalanatmikdiakti), 

power, three (iriJakii), 55. 
pracchdy question, 100. 
pradhdnay 104, 115. 
pradhdnatdy predominance 90. 

duration of three hours, 229, 

prdkdmydy 36. 

Prakaidy light, 46, 51, 80, 100, 110- 
112, 131, 136, 169, 227,260. 
prakdia-vimarsay 116. 

Nature, 27, 34, 89, 98, 104, 
88, 219, 127, 129-131, 144, 148, 
115, 117, 223. 

Prakrlyafida, 124, 167. 
pralnya, dissolution, 126. 
pralqvakala (pralavakevali), 1C, 57, 101, 
110, 111,126,177. 

pramdqa, knowledge, 30, 34. 37, 38, 54, 
3^60, 75, 76, 124, 159, 175, 177, 
185, 186, 190, 194, 197, 198, 214, 


General Index 


281 


pramdtS, empirical experient, 22, 24, 
30 , 37 , 38, 54, 58-60, 75, 124, 159, 
175, 177, 185, 186, 190, 194, 197, 
198, 232. 

premia, object of knowledge, 30, 37, 
38, 54, 58-60, 75, 110, 124, 159, 
175,177,185,186,197, 198, 264. 
pramiti, non-relational knowledge 30, 
37, 38, 169, 198. 

pramitikals, state of awareness, 189, 


prdfui, breath, 12, 18, 21, 24, 29, 31, 
33,35,36,44,49,61, 77,89,95,126, 
149, 178, 181, 187, 196, 208, 217, 
218,227,264-266. 

prdda-apdtut, exhaling and inhaling, 
132 ) 157 • 


prdtuicdray exhaling, 189, 196, 264. 
prd^ramdtdy the experient of brea¬ 
ths, 77. 

primava (om), 126, 151, 152, 178. 
prdxtdydmay 184, 201. 
prdptiy 36, 

prasamkhydnay gnosis, 261, 269: 

expansion, 13, 46, 114, 163, 


prasdroy extension, 136, 183, 188, 190. 
prasavdy procreation, 219, 220. 
prainay query, 63. 

pratibhdy divine indeterminate consci¬ 
ousness, 93, 94, 98. 

pratihimbay reflection, 83, 108, 134,159, 


pratUthdy stability, 252, 

^atyabhijfidy recognition, 135, 138, 140, 

Pratyabhijfiahrdayam, 266. 

pratyekabuddhay 29. 

praveSay absorption, 13. 

prayatnay effort, 69. 

prayojanay purpose, 19. 

pretOy corpse, 125, 229. 

Prthiviy earth, 88, 102, 104, 108, 113, 
128,130,131, 134,136-138, 142,148. 
prthivi-odday 102, 104, 124, 167. 
purdttay 118. 


pdrtfay whole, 7, 190, 205. 
purtt^ay 27, 35, 71, 87, 89, 98, 117, 127, 
129,130,144,148. 

purya^iakay the subtle body, 19, 24, 33, 
41, 97, 217, 218, 220,227, 231, 235. 
purya^fakapramdtdy experient of the 
subtle body, 24, 77. 

Puspadanta, 166. 


question-answer, 6, 8, 14-16, 21, 31, 
47, 48. 50,58,61,63-65,76,83,84, 
90, 97, 100, 108, 228, 269. 


fdgay attachment, 89, 98-100, 102, 
127,129, 130,144, 148. 
rajaSy 40,140,216. 

Raxnadeva, 271. 

rasay 27, 39, 46, 47, 89, 128, 129, 144, 
148 209 

rasandy 89, i29,131,144,148. 
Ratisekh^, 104. 
raudray dreadful, 40. 
reasoning {tarka)y 201, 204. 
recognition {pralyabhijiid)y 52. 
reflection (pratibimba)y 3,119,120,125, 
134, 140, 142, 149,164,173. 
ritual, 203, 240. 
rodhanay 229,230. 

Rudra, 62, 101, 109, 203, 204, 208, 
226, 227, 256, 269. 

Rudrayamala, 15, 110, 269, 270. 
rupay colour and form, 27, 39, 46, 47, 
69, 89, 128, 129, 131, 144, 148, 209. 


word, 27, 39,46,47, 89,128,129, 
131, 148, 209. 
sacetanoy conscious 125. 
sacrifice, 210,240,241,258. 

^a4angay six limbs of yoga, 201. 
Sadasiva, 9, 14, 17, 28, 47, 56, 65, 75, 
89, 99, 101, 102, 104, 108, 110, 114, 
117, 119, 124-130, 141, 142, 144, 
147, 148, 154, 156, 194, 229, 241, 

242,256. . ,no too 

sddhandy spiritual practice, 27,108,128. 

SadyojdtUy 17, 246, 251. 
sahajay innate, 66. ^ 
sahajavidyd, Siva vidydy 201. 
sahasrdray 21. 

sahxdayatdy taste for beautiful things, 

85. _ 

Soiva Agama, 2, 4, 21, 36. 131,134, 

201 . 

Sedva Sdstray 151, 152, 167,173,174, 
178, 259, 271. 

^aiva SiddhdnUiy 82,85. 

Saiva system, 81. .n oo oo 

sakaloy the limited bemg, 10, 23, 2y, 

205. 

idkinfy yoginis with supernatural power, 

fdffiSS'to Sakti. 204,209,210. 
iSktaUmtra, 151,152. 

175,187. , » ^7 ft 

^akti, the Divine Ene^, 1, 2. 4,7, 8, 
10 11 13-15. 17, 18, 20, 21, 23-25, 
28,’ 30, 32-34, 36-42, ^46, 49, 51, 
52 54, 55, 57, 59-62, 64, 66, 67, 70, 
72-75, 77, 78. 81-84, 86, 88*90, 99- 
102, 104, 108-110, 114, 117, 120, 



282 


Pard-TrUikd-Vivarana 


122-126, 130, 134, 135, 138, 141, 
142, 144, 147, 148, 154, 159, 160, 
162, 166, 168-171, 173, 176, 182, 
185-187, 192, 194, 195, 201, 203-206, 
209-211, 218, 219, 225, 228, 230, 
232-234, 238-241, 251, 253, 254, 
256, 258, 264, 266, 269. 
iakti, aghord, a benevolent Sakti, 23. 
^akti, apard, the sakti that brings 
about difference, 28, 55, 63, 64 

72, 75,79, 110, 123, 125, 142, 183- 
185, 204, 206, 209, 210, 212, 233, 
234. 

iaktiy ghordf iakti that leads jtvas 
towards the world, 28. 
iakti, ghoratard, iakti that leads beings 
to the downward path of the world, 
28, 41. 

iakti, kauliki, the presiding deity of 
the body and others, 61, 62. 
iakti, para, see para iakti, parapard, 28 
oo, 63, 64, 71-73, 75, 79, 80 91* 
96, 110, 119, 120, 123, 126, 134 ’ 

233’ 934 

iaktiksobha, union with the female 
partner, 215. 
iaktiman, 63, 64, 254. 

contact with the energy 
in the middle path, 263 

179, 

^amddhi, vyoma, ecstasy in the void, 

samdnya, 19, 199,231.’ ’ 

sartmrasya, complete equipoise, 2 , 171 , 

samata, sameness, 7, 39, 42 50 51 
samdveia, absorption, 2, 228 257 
sambandha, relation, 16, 17, 19 20 80 
adivya, sambandha, 17, 65. ’ 

antardla, sambandha, 47 53 
divyadiiya, sanibandha, \1 ' 

mahdn, sambandha, 17, 46, 47 ’ 65 
para, sambandha, 16, 46 47 64 
Sambhfi, 4 . > , -r. 

Sambhunatha, 64, 265. 
samghatta, union 15, 206, 219 221 
samhdra, dissolution, 9, 17-lQ qn 
60, 64, 85, 102, 12^125, 163 ’l71 
17| 188, 190, 195, 214,’ 230,’ 25^ 

sarnhdrabfja, the seed syllable 18 
Samkhya, 173. 


Sanikhyayoga, 57. 

Samkhyakarika, 200. 
sarnpufa, putting a mantra between two 
mantras one going before and other 
following, 255. 
sampitfayoga, 119. 
samputikarana, 250, 254,255. 
sarnsdra, world, 28, 39, 86. 
samskdra, impression, 18. 
samvdra, letters produced by the con¬ 
traction of the throat, 176. 
samvid. Consciousness, 60, 63, 98, 110, 
114, 225. 

samvid iakti. Consciousness-power, 5, 
227. 

samyama, the practice of dhdrand, dhydna 
and samddhi, 225, 235. 

Sanatkuinara, 17, 65. 
sankoca, contraction, 199,223,233. 
sahkoca-vikdsa, contraction and c.k- 
pansion, 263. 

iarira, para, causal body, 221. 
prdiia, iarira, 220. 

puryastaka, iarira, the subtle bodv. 

220 . 

idkta, iarira, the body made of divine 
energy, 220, 221,228, 235. 
spanda, iarira, the body made of 
vibration, 220, 221, 235. 
sthula, iarira, the gross bodv, 34, 220, 
221. 

suksma, sarira, the subtle body, 34, 
221 . ^ 
Sarvdedra, 82, 222. 

sarvasarvdtmakatd, omnifariousness 91. 
Sastra, holy texts, 12 14,16-20, 60, 
100-102, 108, 116, 119, 149, 151, 
166, 176, 193, 206, 225, 226, 245, 
258,269,271. 

Bhairava, Sastra, 85, 151, 152. 

Mata, ^dstra, 25, 40, 81, 82, 188, 259. 
Niidcara, ^dstra, 81, 

Nydya, Sastra, 270. 

Purva, Sdsfra, 101, 108, 122, 123, 166, 
, 193, 195, 196,225, 226. 

Saiya, Sastra, see Saiva. 
yaipiava, Sastra, 151, 152, 259. 
Virdvali, ^dstra, 223. 
sat, being, 81, 203. 
sattd, existence, 80, 224. 
sattva, a gima, 40, 67, 80, 140,216, 225. 
satya, short a, 167,224. 
sauh, 204, 207, 210, 223, 225-229, 233, 
234, 238, 240, 242, 245, 25-1-256, 
^ 259-262,265,267,269. 

Sauri, 270. 

savikalpa,\\’ix.h. thoughts, 15,67, 98, 164. 


General Index 


283 


savikalpajhana, determinate know¬ 
ledge, 181. 
script, saradfi, 219 . 
scriptures lipi, 233. 238. 

Self, 3, 15, 18-21, 31, 33, 35-38, 43, 44, 
48, 53, 54, 50, 62, 63, 69, 92, 94, 96- 
101, 109, 116, 119, 157, 160, 161, 
168, 1/6, 177, 190, 192, 194-198, 206, 
211, 218, 220, 224, 227, 229, 233, 

self-awareness (hoc/ha), 139, 140. 
senses (inchiya), 38-40, 42, 44,' 46, 77 

117,230, 232, 237), 266. 

sex, nl, 206. 

sexual union, 207. 

^^^208^ 204, 

Sidclhasanatana, 80. 

Sicldhatantra, 102, 256. 
siddhi, accomplishment, 5, 6, 31-34, 50, 
81,150, 226,232. 

Mhd, flame, 245, 247, 252. 
iikluibandhana, tying of the tuft of hair, 
249, 252. 

iiksd, teaching, 179. 
silence, 76. 

Sindha, 105. 

Sirnhagupta, 2. 
iisya, disciple, 13. 

O,’ ‘O’ 12-17, 21, 25, 28, 

31, 33, 34, 36, 37, 40, 42, 44-47, 49- 
o7 50, 60, 62-66, 70-75, 77- 

84, 86, 88, 90, 98, 99, 100, 102, 104, 
‘2’ “0, 120, 122-124, 

26, \21, 134, 13.5, 137, 138-144, 
‘’’3> ‘3^1, 156, 157, 1.59, 
oo’ 2^’ '68-171, 173-176, 181, 

'62, 184-188, 192-194, 198, 199, 
204-206, 208, 211, 213, 219, 222, 
224, 225, 228, 229, 241-244, 251-2.53, 
2o7, 261, 262, 265, 266, 269, 270, 

hvabija, the white semen, 175, 185, 

192,218,220. 

Swabindu, the sound am. 173. 

Sivadrsti, 34, 37, 40, 44, 66, 98, 99, 
^60, 109, 156, 157, 168, 169, 253, 

Sivadrstyalocana, 100. 

^iya fyrnmata, 10. 

Sivayakti, 2, 33, 36,129,176,191,199, 
.220,258. 

Sivasutra, 225. 

Siva-vidya, 54, 59, 60, 201. 
smararia, remembrance, 234. 
smardnanda, the bliss of sexual union, 
210 . 


Jodhakay purification, 156, 157, 159, 
160. 

hdhanay the act of purification, 156- 
160. 

iodtiYOy the object of purification, 156- 
1*60. 

Jodhya-Jodhakabhdvay 105, 119. 
soma, 87. 88, 163, 171, 175, 190, *191, 
229, 235, 265-267. 
somakaldy 267. 
soma-sakliy 163. 
soindm^a, 263, 266. 

Somananda, 16, 22, 34, 37, 40, 45, 56, 
62, 63, 66, 80-83, 86, 90, 100, 156, 
190, 198, 253, 258, 260, 262, 272. 
sound, 25, 56, 68-70, 178. 
space, 8, 9, 11, 22, 24. 

Jfidray 23. 

hikra-^liitay semen and blood, 210. 
siVcsfro, subtle, 31, 34, 35, 154, 159. 
iidabijoy the syllable V«’, 173. 
iunyny void 25, 71, 78, 215, 218, 227, 
231. 

iunya-catuskay r r 1, ], are known as 
four void vowels, 214. 
^unrapramdtdy the e.xperient of the 
void, 24, 29, 77, 97, 110, 1IJ, 126. 
supreme verbum {pardidk)y 47, 180, 
186, 194. 

jMnv?, sun, 87, 88, 175, 190, 191, 229, 
235, 265. 

susumndy the middle channel, 2, 42, 44, 
184, 207, 208, 260,264, 266. 
susuptiy deep sleep, 28. 

sutray 179, 267. 

svabhdvay essential nature, 159. 
Svacchanda Sastra, 69, 168. 

Svacchanda Tantra, 14, 102, 119, 181, 
183. 


svapna, dream, 28. 

vowel, 185, 188, 197. 
svanlpa, nature, 85, 115, 116, 264. 
svarupa-dmariana, awareness of essen¬ 
tial nature, 269. 

sidtantryoy freedom, 2, 39, 41, 68, 70, 
108, 117, 139, 174, 175, 230, 232. 
h'dtantrya^aktiy the power of auto¬ 
nomy, 162, 163. 

svdtmasamvittiy consciousness of the real 

Self, 3‘ 


tamaSy delusion, 40, 140, 199, 216. 
tdmasay darkness, 83. 
tanmdtray subtle element, 89, 98, 115, 
117, 128, 220. 

Tantra, 14, 46, 87, 93, 105, 192, 205, 
233, 236, 271. 


284 


Para-Trisikd- Vivarana 


Tantraloka, 1, 2, 28, 29, 83, 173, 233. 
Tantrasamuccaya, 74. 

Tantrasara, 18, 29, 100, 163, 233, 2G0. 
tarka, reasoning, 261. 

tarkat Sat, right reasoning, 201. 
Tatpurusa, 17, 246, 251. 
tattvay categories, 20, 23, 29, 77, 87, 
88, 98, 102, 104, 113, 113-118, 123, 
134, 150, 174, 201, 213, 241, 242, 
244, 230, 255, 266. 
tattvaSy thirty-six, 27, 112, 116, 212, 
242. 

tejas, the fire element, 128,130,148,214. 
pramdiiOy tejasy a stage o[samadhiy 219. 
pramdtr, tejas, a stage of samadki, 215, 
219. 


thought-construct {vikalpa), 137. 

Tilaka Sastra, 222. 

time, 8, 9, 11, 12, 22, 24, 25, 27, 29, 30, 
32, 33, 33, 64, 90, 94, 118, 119, 127, 
181,183,194 224 228,229,24-1,267. 
tithi, duration of one lunar day, vowel 
263-263. 

tithisa, the lord of the vowels, 207, 210- 
214,216. 

transcendental {visvdtfta), 2C1, 202, 
207,211,227,261,269. 
triad {trika), 70, 73, 73, 212, 223. 
triangular (trikondkdra), 206, 238: 
trident 77, 98, 109, 225, 238, 

G3, 75, 81, 83-83, 

trika, dgama, 102. 
trika, mdrga, 82. 

Trikahrdaya, 14, 150. 

Trikaratnakula, 179. 

Trikasara, 27. 

Trika sarasastra, 30. 

^f44!l6r,’272.'^’ 

Trikatantrasara, 176, 207, 210 

triangle, 58, 59, 185, 207, 210, 
254, 265. 

saktiy trikoria, {kriydmndrd). 207 210 
254, 266. 

siva, trikoria, (jndnamudrd), 207, 210 
254, 266. 

trimsakd, text consisting of thirty verses 
18. 


trUikd, the divine goddess of three 
iaktis 17, 18. 

trUula, trident, 58, 59, 173, 238, 241 
254. 

trtiyarn brahma, 205, 213, 214, 222, 242. 


Tryambaka, 4. 

tiirya, the slate of the fourth, 16, 23, 
218. 

tiirydtita, the state beyond the fourth, 
23. 

tiiriya, the fourth state,28. 
tufi, minute moment, 92, 183, 184, 187, 
196, 264, 267. 

tiak, the sense organ of touch, 89, 
129, 131, 144, 148. 

iiccdra, subtle movement of mantra, 208. 
ucedfana, employment of a mantra for 
the purpose of distracting an enemy, 
40,46. 

Ucchusma, 151. 

udyoga, one of the activities in the spi¬ 
ritual plane, 17, 19, 189, 190, 197, 
198, 211. 

Uma, 266. 

universe {viiva), 19, 63, 64, 69, 70, 81, 
86, 87, 95, 98, 112, 136, 156, 174, 
179, 188, 197, 204, 203, 207, 211, 
223, 229, 243, 244, 253, 255, 260, 
272. 

unmand, the 12th measure oi pranava, 
109, 126. 

unmesa, 93, 95-98, 136-138, 140, 162- 
164, 173, 175, 182, 213, 216, 218, 
251. 

upadhmdniva, 179, 186. 
npastha, 89, 129, 130, 144. 
updya, means, 28, 152. 

dnava, updya, 22, 37, 151, 152, 236, 
263,266. ■ 

sdkta, updya, 22, 151, 152, 236, 263, 
266. 

sdmbhava, updya, 22, 151, 152, 236, 
263, 266. 

Utpaladeva, 24, 110, 139, 181, 182, 
186. 

uttara, 20, 21,23, 25, 49, 76, 82-84, 201. 

vdcaka, 12, 47, 122. 
vdeya, 12, 47, 122. 
vahni, 209. 

vaikharl, gross speech, 8, 9, 12, 15, 
48, 64, 69, 79, 109, 111, 118, 125, 
128, 156, 157, 159, 171, 176, 177, 
183, 192, 229 253. 
vairdgya, 67. 

vaisnavi^ a sakti, 170, 208. 
vaiiya, 23. 

Vajasaneya Tantra, 150. 
vdk, speech, 8, 89, 126, 129, 130, 136, 
138, 144, 148,216,220. 
vdkya, sentence, 271. 

Vakyapadiya, 100, 225. 


General Index 


285 


Vallabhacary’a, 270. 

vama, beautiful, appealing, 83. 

Vamadeva, 17, 246, 251. 

V^ana, 183. 
vamanabhaksatia, 231. 
vdmanayiikti, 134. 

Varahagupta, 271. 

Vdrdhi, a deity, 170, 298. 
vania, letters, 102, 154, 199. 

vaniasrsfi, creation of lettei-s, 250, 
254, 255. 

vaJitva, unity consciousness, 37. 
Vatsalika, 270. 

vdyu, air, 88, 128, 130, 131, 144, 147, 
206,251. 

Veda, 82, 167, 173, 225. 

Vedanta, 68, 1 74, 205. 

Vedic tradition, 24. 
vedya, object, 159. 
vidhi, rule, 77, 85, 201, 240. 
vidyd, 89, 98-101, 124, 127, 129, 130, 
143, 192, 233, 234. 
vidyeivardy 101. 
view {drfti)^ 184. 
vijfldna, 149, 151. 


vijfidna-dlayay integral knowledge, 94. 
vijndndkala {vijildna kevali) 10, 57, 
101, 110, 158, 175, 177. 
Vijnanabhairava, 45, 97, 113, 207. 
vikalpa, determinate knowledge, 22, 41, 
94, 180, 223, 227, 230, 234 
vikalpa-iaktiy 231. 
vikdsay expansion, 223. 
vik^obha, agitation, 43. 
vildpana, veiling, 19, 189, 197, 198, 211. 
vilaya,9,\9. 

Vimala, 2. 

vimar^dy 10, 27, 37, 46, 51, 79, 80, 97, 
110-112, 131, 218, 227, 253, 260. 
vimar^a-iaktiy 161,219. 
viparyayay wrong knowledge, 193, 199. 
viroy the male partner in kulaydgay 204, 
207-210, 221, 222, 226, 232, 235, 
245, 246,249, 250, 254, 261, 263. 
virayoginiy the male and female 


partners in kulaydgay 206. 
vlrydy semen, 42, 52. 
vi^dy the region of expansion, 206. 
visargdy manifestation, 1, 25, 30, 32, 
36, 48, 55, 67, 79, 88, 98, 102, 104, 
124, 168, 174, 183-185, 187, 188, 
190, 195, 197, 199, 200, 207, 209- 
211, 217, 221, 224, 225, 241, 242, 
264, 265, 267. 


visarga kald or visarga iaktiy the phone¬ 
me ^aK 144, 148, 174, 184, 187, 
197. 


visarjanlydy 179. 


vUesdy particular, 231. 
vislesdy scpaiation, 188, 195, 199, 221. 
visltsatidy separation, unification, 43, 
44, 47, 56, 205, 265. 

Visnu, 11, 12, 62, 109, 150, 156, 224, 
256, 257. 
vi^uvaty 23, 28. 
viiva, universe, 57, 255. 
viiv(V7iayay immanent, 171. 
vUvottinidy ti*anscendent, 171. 
vivdrdy expansion, 176. 
vivaraiidy 7. 

void, {sunya)y 21, 25, 29, 39, 50, 71, 
111, 165-167, 172, 194, 214, 215, 
218,231. 

vowels (svaraviviia)y 87, 88, 122, 123, 
137, 140, 141, 149-153, 166, 173, 
175, 179, 185, 192, 194, 195, 211, 
213, 214,216, 217, 219, 220. 
vowels, ambrosial, {amrtavarna)y 139. 
vyadhikaraiidy 10. 

vydpinly a measure of praD^avdy 109, 125. 
Vyasa, 45. 
vyatirekdy 35. 
vyomdy void, 78. 
vyornacarly 39, 50. 


will {icchd)y 2, 17, 90,104, 124, 159, 
162,163,165,212,215,228,251,268. 
word, 8, 10, 12, 15, 42, 47, 48, 68, 69, 
74,91,96.102,104,108, 114, 121- 
123, 128, 154, 155, 158, 161,225. 
word, conventional, 105. 
worship, 40, 54, 205, 207, 223, 245, 
249,250,251,253,254,256-261,271. 


yojandy unification, 250, 257. 
yamaldy union, 2, 82, 206, 269. 
Yasaskara, 270. 

yatrakdmdva^dyitvdy a yogic power, 37. 
yogdy 15, 53, 85, 88, 151, 196, 201, 203, 
204, 208, 211, 232-234, 239, 254, 


261,262, 268, 270. 

Yogasutra, 31, 35, 225, 235. 

TogeJvariy a iaktiy 170, 208. 
yogiy 13,41, 57, 116, 126, 149, 150, 178, 
195, 203, 208, 215, 229, 230, 231, 
236, 238, 262, 268, 269. 

yoginty the female partner of kulaydgay 
2, 3, 160, 170, 178, 203, 207-210, 
221, 222, 226, 227, 236, 245, 246, 


249-251, 254, 263. 
yogimbhuhy born of 3.yoginfy2y 3, 226. 
yojanikdy vojanikddiksdy (a kind of initia¬ 
tion ),'^2i 29. 
yoniy 205, 206. 
you, thou, 70-72. 



V 

'4% 

>1 




I <«v* 


*< 

. » 

I 

'y 

ir 






r^TI55^55T5SnJTr^frq^BTiT|T snTJft 
?r|^ZT2Tm55f5r^^?TT^^?T’f«T*f 

il ? il 

^RRFf I 

^'^rsg^TrJTi ^«Trft ^r 

^5% II R II 

?lT5Tf^^R»R? r^T^ 

2Tr I 

sroiHifir 'HTfr^tT^r 

f^SHTTOT R%VlRirfff5T^ II ? II 

sfZTciffi^qFfJTT F^iftrcT'T^^sr: i 

!^riRTi?r^: 5f^: «ft^»is; qRrt?^'^:: II v II 

f^srf^nsiTr^gt^rR sifs^frwJT =^ i 

»T^nf^5T^'%fT f5B!T% II Ml 







3T?T^T 

o 

tg^t^cTT ^rl U ? n 
•\ 

'T^F^'4f^JTt[:, 3T5lT^5l?n TTT^qJTT ^^TT 

3TT*T?^ q?5^>S5q|?Tc^, qff ^f%,; I ?TT 

^ ?JtqJT5q|FqJfMqqt q^qqcT: cpTWiTitTT q^iprilT aTT^Tq- 
fqcuTiT^T^f^^fe^TqifqFq-qT q^Tq^T q^q|Tq-qqjqn^ sr^^- 
qjT^qjfe^rqt fq^sr, qiqq; q5q^q:^FqGq|fTf:a^qcq- 

fq^qq qq^ i qq q qqrqqqyqqfqqfqqqr qqq^rq qqqrq- 
^qr, qq?g q^q^qt q?]q; qqtf^qq qqr^q qqfqqqjT^qfqqq- 
q^fqq ^qqqqqiqq fqqqfq, qqi 3T%'TqTqTqTqfIiqq?q;T'^- 

c\ c 

q^qiqi rrqqifqq: ^qfqqiqqq'rqq'^Fqcqiq; f^fq^q qqfq- 
fqq^Fq; qf^ q^qqjqq;!^ ^qtsq aTRf^q;, qq qi^sqqrqq^fq^qq'l: 
3Tt?:, qsqqj 5q: qqt^q qi^eqqrqq^qt: ^qqiqsif qmTqTfq- 
q;-?:o^q rqqqsqiqTTiT, qqrft 5 qiqq^qf^qqjq^^q,—^fq qjqc^ 
sqq^qjqr ^qfqfcqsiqi tq qTiqpqfq:, qqiqTqtqqsqqfq:- 
qTqTq?=qqTqrqt%fqqTf;qqqT^qTfq5Fq^q:TqqTTT q^qqi'qq^q 
qpq^q'qqra^fqqT, q|frt qqq?cqTfqq^r?qfq q^^q't aqqf^qqi, 
qqr fqqr q^q^cqTfqq arqq^rqqTqrqT aj-qqTqq^iq; i qq q 

fqi^, trq^, 3Tq, fqiqli^—^cqffq^qqj^qT q qJlfqq I qq irq q 

q^qqTq-qqtqfqqfcq^sqTqr qrqvT qq^qqqqiqqqqqjiqqq'fq 

^ c. c 

qq; ?q ^qqqc^fqqqt ^qicq'^q qqi^iqq^ fq^i^T^q q^q 

^jfqqqfqf^iJ-qqrqTqTq^ ifq i q^q^ qq ^^ft^fq^fq \ 







?T?rrt7T =q q^qqiqr 

‘3T^^^’ %T^ =qq^r^: 3Tf^:i:3Tq?^fq5^?5=^T=qqc#cl^<if^%: 
q^q^cTtq^^qqif^qq^T ^qT^qjq^rq qT?fFq?Rqqj fqir^T^ I q^q 
=q ?ffq^ I q^cqrfq^feqj^'q qiiiqt^q- 

qq?%q ^qfqq^itq^qrcqqr ^i%q, ^rqftft'if^q ^rqf^qFqf^^^: 
>Tqqq\ "q^q^q qqi ^qT^fq^s^jin fqf^qtqrcqqr, ^qqqRRTiq- 
^qrqq^qrqsgqir^oJTq^nqr^qq, qqq =q^TqqT^ qt^T^ q^qt^JT- 
^nqr'qmq^^'q ^q%q, qq^q q^qqqqiaT^^: qcqq'q: 
^fjqqtqqqi, q^^ =q ^^rqq^rq^i^q qqfqrqTqqq^q; arq qq 
^q't ^Tqqjq^qq ^qcqfq^^, q=5^#^q =q qqqqrT ^^qqr 1 
^^TFqFqqtqTsqq^r^fq^qqfq^ I’ qqi =q qq- 
^q^qT^qwfqq^qcqtqTf^iqJTgqp^ Fq^fqf^B^sqrfq^ ^qi- 
sqq^T^: I qq ^qq^ q^q^qt qsqqr =q ?qT?qTq%q qqr fqq^rfq 
‘3T^5tq qTTqTi^qqiqqt qqq^q’q’ ^fq, qqr ^q 
^Rqrqi'^^^qqT ^qiqiT^qqT q^qiqtq^qTgqiTTq qi^rq q^i^ 
?qTcqqqf ■jjcR%q arFqq^qiqT ^qrq^TqqmqTqT^Fl^'^qqq” 
eqfqqfqqtq^Tq; q^t^TqqT qq?r?qqTTTqq[fqqfqqTqirqT?iqqT- 
qq=5#qTc^ q^'qts^qrqj^qfqqq^:, qqtsfq fq5T]jq^%: 3Rq» 
qrqqR;!^ qi'qtqsqqq^^t^sfq ar^q^R:,—^fq arqqFFrq, 
qjleqfqqj =q argqqcqq arqq^qfq^ qfqfjrq q;qq ? ffq ^qrmq 
qqtqnqqqft^TisiqFT^T'JTTq q^^qjqq^JroT fqwq, ‘ar^^rq 
HT q^TqiT^^^qq qqqraqqrqq^ifqqqjqqT qqgqiq' 
qrqrq^^ i ‘gnts^ fq^q^iq’ ^fq qq?rq qqq%: 1 qqifi— 
qi^ arqtqTqq^qt q ^^^fq qiq^urqrq, ^qrqlf jqqRq^qjFqq- 
arfqfq^yTqq TqTfqfq^qTqFqqqqqfqqjTf^fqfeqTqjqq 












V 




WT srfhqu^; arsTfcrqf^qT^Jrq 

'H^: get ^T 3 T^ f^ 5555 Tq’ %lrf%^qT- 

fT^qqT^ q^'t^, q^rq^'^Rt 5 srmq 

^^qrta^T^c’^qqfeqRT gq^q^qi^, q^Tf^q g q't^l^- 
srr^TTRT^—?qT5^ fqjqq:, 5 qqrqq 1 qq qq qq 

qqiqr q^fqiRifqq^ ar^qq qr sqq^T^ - f^qq:, qqq^T^Ttq 
q^^^fqc^ f q?q: qqr^ qrq?q5qrq5q qqsqq^I^qrqq qqfq, 
arq: qr^rq q^q'i Fqq^fq ‘qqt ^rq' ifq qrqfqj ^qiq;, ar^Jrq 
qqq qqq^^q fqwfq q^r^, 3n=qqT q5q?qtq«iqi^fqq 
^fsrqq qqq q RTf^;, qrq^q qqfq ‘|qj jjqrq' ifq 1 
qq%q ‘qR qqrq’ ^fq q^qsq^ 1 qqifq f| ^qq^qqR* 
fqqrqqqt q^^iqRqq q^qqrq—^qrq: 1 %q^ qfqiqqrqqqr 
qfe^qrqPRTq^ ‘q^’ ^fq qfqqt ^^q^rq^f:, ^Tf^qcqqiq- 
qqr ^?;Tq5Trqq^ 'q^q’ ^Fq q^q^qqq^T'^: 1 ?^EFq^q% q 
1 t^q= 5 q qR^^qeqqj^Fq qTqqFqjqRT^rq q^Rr 
q^qiqr: qFqqt Fqqqq^^ 1 ^q q qqkJ^qqq-qqr^qqqtqqi^; 
3 Tq qq qrqqqi^q qqiFqqqiqt ^qlTr^qqqiqq^qt^Tqif^ 
qr^qqq^q^fq^ifFqq^ qq ^qiT^-trqjR-qqiT^-qqjfT-qqiR- 
qq>R-qTq?rT-qq>T?:,-qqqT-r^qjTT-^q)-qq;TT-qq;rT-q^T'^TFqqqqrqq- 

q'tqqr l .q^' q ?q=515??q?q (>7Tq Y, qcs ^o) 

‘^qF^qq^ F?qcqr ^qq ^q: qqrF^rq: i 

yq^dlRd’ II (^o 6 /^R) 

5% I qq q' qgq^Fq: qqq qqqqiq^ qq^qFqqq ^Fq i qq 
qsqqr^^IT^qqjqrq: q'^ qq ^?q: I qq argq^ qq?qTf=qTiqT 
q^qfqrr^y-fqsqiFqsqT^qT^qtq^^q qtq^qqcqiq i q|q fqqifq^ 








‘fq^ f%?mqTJT: q^5q^: i 

ar^q^^qi =q =qTfqqfi^cT: 11’ 

I trq^^ 3T^qT qq 

f^TT?q?q q^q srfqjTTrtq 3T?^?g 
q^q-cTt^q qaf-q^-qi^rqr^^TTSTfqqqr q^PTs, q«7mq^ =q 
ffqq qq-q qrqq; 'arg^t qi^r^’ ^c^rf? 

r>i?piTqtq-q'q-qq-qTqqT^qT-qi51 tr^T^q qqgq^^q ^^qqq^ 
qFsq^Tq^rfcqqji?, arg^T^qTqqTTTqq^T^T^^qf^Tq-^rf^qqf- 
qqTqf^e^r^Tcqq^ rqq.5TT^q^Tql^ wqqq qtfeq^ qq^ftqqt sftq- 
^?¥q«5 1 3Tq qq sqq^gqi^Tqiq ^qTqfqq^TmqtqTq ^qiqrf?- 
^qq5^ q'tqq^qq i q q^qq|qT¥-q qqqtfqq^rq qqqqfq- 
qiqqq’q, ^q qqiq^q arq qicqqq—^qTcHT qq^iq^q^iq: m 
qq^T^Tqjq: ^qicqyq^ ^qRqifqFq^^^q q^qqfqqq^q qcjqfqqq^- 
?qpqq^q q^^qqr qq^f qq Fqq^fq,—q^rrq qq-fqfqqqq^^T- 
X^w. qqr qiq-^q q^q qqifq—?fq qiqq; qrq^q qqiq, 
q;q?^’ 'q^q qqrq, ^fq’ ?Fq qrq^ 

qsqiqq;^' ^fq i qsr qq'rFq qa^itqiq^q'tfq ^rreiTfq 

qiq^^ ^Afqjq^tsq oqq^n:, ^ qq gq;: q^: ?fq!=q: 1 
qtcqqql^rqTT qiit q^qq^rq^ qqqi^ i 
arfqqq^^q qqi sqiwTq q^qqq^q^ II 

fq<qif|qq^qqT 5 55^q qq^r arfqqsq: 

oqq^T^q ^q qqzf q I 

q^q^^qt gqqfq qq^ f^qq^ li 
^qT^q'q^qTqr q^qf^qt a^q^^fq 1 
3pq:'^55^qppM p^qql qfl^tq^ 11 







q’?:T5i'tr5T?T 




;^WTr q5q?cZI2f 

q^fq^ II 

rq3Tfe3I<t3Ttrq3Tiqf^foT5q ^qJT 

3T3q|ir5fT3I^qr^ 

^T^riT aTTqr^^5'ii3Tt3Tq 

aTqcSTqr53m^{'^^^%;T ll’ 

fqq^qfiT—^r^T I ^1^' «frqtqTq??qit: 
'q^rqei^?qq?q^qqq^^qq|Rq;^q qqq^rT^^q^^qqq-cT'?.^^ T 
I q^qff^Tfq^^qTsf qq sr^q^qi^- ^= 5 ^ 1 ?^- 
qfqfqcTiqr mm 1 qq?'4 :1 arPR^q ‘q\f^^T’ 5F^, fqq'Jir 

?=5gr-5Trq-F5pqiqr ^^rf?nqifeqTqTfrT^Fqq?=5qrqT^ 
tF^^T f’qfl, f^IRT m fF^c15qToqFei^^<qq qiFqqt,—qq- 
^=50^^Fqqrqqqt qFq:p;qq^ ^|TF^q?rq^T 
aiFR^qq, qgtqrlq m ??qFq?^Tq 1 ?^Fq 

q'^q; qsF^q, 3 Ta^?:qKqTfqTq =q Fq^wf:—Fq^: 51^: q^r^Fq— 
?Fq Fq^r^T, q 5 fq^rq^^^tqjqtqrq F^F^rq^T; qqrq^sFq fq^qjT- 
sRqiq 1 qqrFf 

Tq^q^rq^qqr qmtFssjFq^q^: 1 ’ 
fFq I arFqqTqTFq^qqtsr q^ qq ^q; qrqic^qiq—?Fq qqi- 

aiqq I qqtqq m ?Tqqqrq<iTr Fqq!: q^^FqsqTqigq^q^ilcqf^i- 
q?3^^?rTqqrqqqrqiqTq Fq5r?q^qfqq^qtqT%q FqsriqV 
qqqs^^iqrFqq^q^q FqF^^q?qiFqqqq^qqTq?q ^qicqqqcq^r^- 
g;qf5-qrqrqicFqqTq?qq:qT^??iqT%5rTF5qqjT ^qq qq gFas; 1 
Ri'qq^iFq^qT^q ^ arpqqFi^qi^'qfqqqiqT ^^'qiqqiqiq ^?itq- 





5555ft^5nfe^qmt ^TF«m^«ft ^:,—i 

^fe^sfq JTTqt^ ?ffq^*TTW Fq;q^qT qr ?, 

15T|^' 

qi ^rfqfTT: q^^rc^qifew 5fq^ i 
?i q^^ ?r5T^ 'jftqp^TBt q q^rq: ii' 

(FT. qjT. ^l^ ) 

?Fq I =q qq?^ qq i 

‘5if^ 5if^ qjq? ^f^'q fqar^arqq;? I 

3T=5gfg gqf^gqfqarqTq ffFS;q;55%qqT3ft II’ 

q?%q ?q?r%q^q snftsrq^rq ^ Fqj^s^qqqjfqqiqq—^fq 
qqt^iqqqtsrqTqq^iqr; l qq;i?^q FqfqTFq^qqqtspnFq I 
arq q?8nqf \ ?fq, q fq?!^ q^T:qfqqj 

qq:, qqt F^ qrqr=qTTF>T qqjq^rq arqrF'qqftiqqq'fqTFq qT:qT:q- 
^qT^q^stTTFTFqqqqTqrqFq^Fq qfqqqFqqqrf^q, ^ q'^T qf^"if 
cIW; Fiqi 'Wq^HH4dHi^^«1NHribR'HRcqictl 
qqi q fq?i^ qqqqFqqqt^q qq, qq qq ^ qfiqFqFcqqrt: 
q®qqq?qq^viTqq>qqT^:q qsPFqq^qqfqqTqifqqiq qqfq 

fewr:, q^q q^^q: q^ qqqtFqqq,—fFq feFqq anqrqfqgq^- 
q^qq ^qiq i qq^’qq ^qqrqrfqqqlsqqq:, q F^ q^gqt 

^qFqqi’qqi qrFqqjrqFq i qqiF^ qqq 5i<tqq qror^qiqgqfq^q, 
qqtsfq ^^qqFqqzq, qqtsFq Fffqqi^r gftqqqjqqiqsqTFi, 
qqtsFq qq^qq^qTcqq^qqqqFqBiq, qqtsfq qqiqqqqiqqqr^- 

c\ 

qi^T^^iqqT^Tqicqt fiqqcqsqqcqT q'^^q^^q^ arT^tqsqsRqiq— 
?[Fq i f|5r qq qTFqf5q5'>5qi^qr^^qFqqi?jFqsTq*qqT^ 
qFqsBq ^x:, qqr q^^F^q arq ^Fq q^q:, qq^'q^q^ 

qt«iT:i qq q^-Fqqt q^TT qq q q^q; ^ 





‘i.%^ ^ ^^FcT STcrr^psgF^T^ 

3T5^5cq; I ^cirfq sq^r^^fqt^^oq^^^srr'il^,— 

5Jig=5#5q?cWTc3; 3T^ qc( SrFqfqg: 

JTTiftq: Stm^T qq f^^qR^fq, cT^ 5 Sifqq^feq^ 

aTfqqr^ITff afgfTT q^req^^qi^J^qr^, I 

F^ ^rrqqi^: srgqqF^^^ ^?5 ?t:,—^F^ ^Rqrq^‘?;qtF3iT^ic^- 
5T 5 argq^FTpcT l^q", cTc^ fg^rqg^T oqq^R^f^cqfq qqJr^— 
?FcT I ^1^ q^q 

T^rTci q^^qFgF^slq 

qcI5 q^?JT Fqvfloq^ | 

^q^fTci^l^qqt^TvimT- 
^.qF^qq^fr 5 ^5? m 11 ^Fer 1 

••”?Tg^ q^'q^5r>s%€T'5fqi? 

3 T 5 ^^qt^^JrFcT tq 51T5" 

3T«i ^5TTfF^q;r^^TF?q%5r- 
F?sqf^^T?qFf?cTqjT^qic^qtqT: 1 
!3rqqRirg«TTFqfTf f^^T ^ 
fiFsF^ ll’ 

^jttF? I ?i«TT '^^T?qrciT5ri^^5’ ^fer 1 sjn^qpj^ 

lTcTc3[ I qqJr^ qTIciTq: ^fTtsFq ^irVT^, ^<sqFq 

^cTfTr^Rqqf^^^^qcqTfg^^fT ?qrcq?^q' ^T^ifqKqfq- 

•jF^Ts^iTFg^q^qr, srriici src^:, afr: ci^sfq 

<SfTq?TF?Gqfq 5Fqicq?^q ^TlFg^gqqT | 

«fl5^'qF^q;Tqt qqq Fq^q^qt Fqoffqq STgqqtqr^^ 

«?STqt^qi^ 'q q Fq^cq | f?^q^^^iqq|qqqt|rqifjl 




rT«ir f^si7:T3PTTt5Ji5TST?cZT5nrcif^^miiiT^ 

^ I q^Jpcmur: 5 I^jt:, 

3TTOn: ■qrrar: 

^errsp^T'iT iRq^ ^w'liTf^^JTf^^- 

P^c^^sfq g;q?|fcriit5iriTq;r- 
fer?«?5qT ^STT 3T^ SJTlfq^'t 

■^.i;i'+idi=hi<rci!^iqifc^^irMdHi fqr fd-^^^ni: ? i ?ri^tj;^^I 

'5^T’ ‘UV.’ cT^'ir ^^ fT 

jft f^T^’fqirifiTqt i 

^5TT .(q. \\) II 

?% I 3Tf^ wfcT fq^fq 3?^—ar*^: an^qi 

^T^T arfTff 3T^ F>T5rFq?(5TqcJIRI|?cIT^JTaTqT 

^f^:, 3T: ^iIsi5qraT 5 % STf^qf^cT:, 
qTirmcTiiT 3TTr«?qir I 

srt: ^sftJT^, 5ft^r ^ ^T*T qi’T^R ^rF^JIT* 

^qitq^ qi^Jr^jf eiiqr, q^^rfq F^ 1 ^|TF?^q q^a^m ^rF^ 1 

5 ^: 5TTq?f ?Rqq5T5T^, ^ qTRsf: I 

‘^T?T FqiR =q >jdRt 5ftq?r 1 ’ (sr. ^h ?i?v) 

?Fd I cT^T =q qrqfT ^hFsp^ ^F^ I 'si' %fkf =q m 
3TqTqtzil«fl^^HfiTq^qfTaq5T^Fq^^lRFd?d^'^f%|?FsT?FqRTr=qqcq^R- 
^qi ^T^'t^?TqiiFq’9m5fd^qqFii:g;qf5qT^q«TJTq4qHTdtq57^FjTJTT 
q;^T ^^iiriTqd^^ ^rr 5^ ‘ 5 ^’ Fq?iq??ddr 

d^T —^T^qF^^FriR ^'^ I 3if%^qi«ir ^qjT^- 

qqRqJTdTf^ld^EfT^T ‘ 3 ^’ qRIciTqjF^mtfqt ^^ ^ 













ff STT^T^X^: #qtrqET3jf^f^=ffq]-fif^5Tf^ ^ 

f^^ft g^T f^gj I ^ gggtsggr=£3?g5>if- 

f^f^^?i:^gc^T^gjir=r^i?cgT g^f^^qgRTqTffr- 

g^igiggi^ 

^^'tqjT^TgmTfrgHTgT^r ^??gTgTgg?gTgTggrT?5T-?i?5T^5Tq5gT- 
3r35^^ ^q’Rgfq-g^fgT^^vjgjft gcfqt?’^'>gaTf?STrg 5 T f^g^?- 
r«T?qr fejTT ?% gtq l gf^ggnT# ggqt fq'Fg;, fg'^^^rg- 

F^g^gtqq^ gg i ^ yTq^tsg 5Tq^:, sTggggr: 

^fq qrq^sqgsf:—ggq't: gegic^ 3^^q5rqg btjt 

g ^rqgTgrgggfg^r^g 5 r?5: 5 % qvtsggr^- 

qiTSg:, q?T[f|—3j5f qjqi^: 3^q qjgj gjq ^^5J 

grFgjgq: ^gqg: ^i%, qg qrgT^'I’sfq qstsFq 

fqjfqq gfjfq^gqj ^qj-^ | q^qj^g qqfq q^qq qq^rJ^^T^q- 
^^®I^3qjfrq I q ^ ^^q; ^qq gfqqiqfqqrqgfviqeqTg I qq 

^iqg g ^rg--3irqq%% qrqq^fqfqsa-^ qqq^qqtq:, qfqqtfq- 
fqs^qr^^rqi g q^q, q%q>q^^q fgqqqfqvi^qfqqqTq:, gqj qq 

Ff qFqqtift g%g^ g^jj ^fq q gq^q; q^q^^ 

Fqqf^orrqq qqg^qq qFqjfiFqcqiqq^: i q q Fgq^q^^r gqFq 

qqr—?Fa q?q 5fiir<q qiFq'^tsq: q;Farg 1 
cir^qj^qg' 5fq g ^ ^ 

^qirqgrqTqfgqqpg qfrqg’ ^^qT^Fq l| fqig I qq^g 

3rq;T’^ ^q^qq;>5r?5qq^q 1 g q^?:q5Fqq^qFqq>q^§Trqf 

I SrFqqtTgq^^rqfg ‘arg^qg’ ^^qfq qqtit arq^q 3Tsq; | 

^^iFf srrqgpq^ 

‘srtirfq q?q fqjqcf Fg^rqf q'tq^rrF^qT^ 1 


?T ir 

?fcT I qr4 ?^rcT-5zra'r^rq^fe^fe>TT5TrTf55T^^*T5^^^^ I 

^ f^JTTirr: I 

^ 2 ^ fi 5 ^tt^cUt: si\^o^^. ^mcsi^'tf^^ li’ (sr. q^r. ^U,^) 

iFcf I 5lTT5siTrar?I?q5^t I 

‘arg^T ’iF=2i^q^T i 

qt¥5iciT 5TR^r tfsng^^ ii’ 

?raf i ^«TT 

^: ?if?sT:. 1’ 

?ciirf? I ar^'^T %?t 3^it<Ji 

3T?qsTT ?—I qjsr 3TJT ^Wi]V. —^i^Fh? ff 
^frJT^qarrtf ?T^gr 3T?qtf4 ^?rfir 
afttiTmif q;F?qi5=^ F^ qir si^m- 

Fqq^sFq ?—iFa" Fq-«iF^rq^qT«?fFqqJr?T srqji^iTT^ 

Fqs?HTc^ qq^r^fii^F^qir m \ iFcr sm^qra^ i 

^'q«^^qq^srT'qF-sq^cTrF?-eJT|Tcq^qT, 5Tqqfi^<ii^isfic^ =q i 

'^^cqqJlF^^qr^’ 

^1% I 3«ir sfT^qra^qciqT q«im?«narr^ qt«?- 

^ 3i^3t ^^rrFqqiqig; i 2 :^ F^ ‘555 

?FcT 1 fiF^ qq^T^q^Tcirqjqt%¥qT^ FfmFq q'Tiqsqir^qfr^ 
qj^qq^r^, ct^ f^ ^qr qitF^^t F^rFs:—?T«Trcq?T^ qF?:frq 
3?Tqf?^q f^q^q^Rq^^fFqqicqqiFjqqf^q^f^TRTcfq, ^ir F^iF^ 
??TFa ar 5 ^^?q^q^RT?j:^ f ^ ^stt ^qF^ 1 q«ilTp^ 








oiiciR^;ii’(a^o-srof^o 

?% 1 ?ifr 51=?: sT^r^ ic?«TffrT:, 

‘?rqr^ 3T«T I ^ ^ 

^T?5??J, arfq^ c!r?qq?H13:^?, qq^Tq QUl^rsqifi; 51^^* ’ 
3iq?qr?q?^q 5Fq qqqrq&T^fq HiqqR'qc^ 
^iirfq^Fq^i^ q|5Tqi^?rqi55qrqT'qr qqqiq^qrfq q^r^^crr 
qq> q^ ?q q^^wq q^qqTqt: ^F^qqqqcqq? Fq^i^qTqi^'firrq^ 
f55^Tfiq, qq q qqr 3T?qg?qq?:^q?TFq^rqic«T^?T'q Fq<tq^» 
q^r qq q^qrqfqiqqRqiqqq^ 3i^5rq;rqq5F?yq^, arg^T 
%q^ qqqtFqq^ i q|^ ^'Iqraq?# 

‘qq«q ^Ffqqq^ ?q qlrqrqqq^qqi^ I 
^rqtqqrqF^F^S'q qqqr% q%c^ ii’ 

^q I Fq^qrfrq^ Fq^q^qtsfqq qjT^^tqqrqF^^^q: i 

qpq^lT^: airq^T Fqfe: ^qqmTqr qt^jg^qiqtqr Fq^q^'^^ 
qqifq ?Fq—5iftTr?q> F^ nFqfq aii^^wqFqqif^q'r^^^ 
3Tq:mq7F?5^q qT'qTfqqeqqq'tqTqRtl^qq ^riqrqt qqr^qFqqqq^Tf 

Fqf^ Fqqq^ I qqtq:q 

‘arFq cqTcqq^q5r?q 5^q^qfqrft q%q i (?qo ?i<i) 

iFq I 

. qj^'JIR'tq I (Ffo Rl?o) 

?Fq I ^sqr ^ F^rqjqqcqrcqFq qFqF^^sFq FqFs^qiq^q qftqf^^' 

^^qqt qqFq^FqqiFqqrFqqqqq?T, qt q?i: arqiq^F^q^ 
^^'qiFqrF^qc^tq qqrFq i q|^ ^Ftqtqrq?qqTl: 

'qiqqiqiT'qRqt fk F^iq^q eqq\Fq^: I ( F5T. q. V9|?o? ) 






I cisrr 

aimr^ i?TT^^r?T i 

sif^q^r 5STc*mT ii 

q;'?:'^rJT frrfer 1^4 qqifq ^nwqqifq qr ii (ftr. ?. vai?^) 

I f# 5TT^r fefe: 5TT^-frf^^qqHT'iTTc^ 3TTT¥^T 

^i^vrmJTTJTarr ^r i ff jj^- 

sr^^TRq- 3i?^:fr^^eTqtrrgjg¥rT^q?T‘?:^^ 3T5 ^?:i%^ 
?^T?T?^>gzf=q^rq^T^^Tr^ f^q^T^mfcT I JTf^ arqqrrsr^q >tt^- 
f^qir^srq^i^ qjT^'n vr^f^;, qqn’mr’qqf 

^T^Rqj^qir^—^fer fq^irq^ir i ^«tt f^^<ir 

^r^T ?TT^r q^TcH^rr qi'^f qr^rf qf^ zmrf qqmqqT<JiqJrq- 

c 

^rq^^qroit ^T iTT^r fq^rr^r ^ fq-frTcTqi^ i cT^t 
sri%q%^TS5fqf^fT qc^; ^Tcf fq^rmrrq, jt Hfrfs- 

’‘TTmcq^rc^ i ^«ir ?TrcTqT^ ?TTa’^rq ^qr^qc5rrc!(, ^ 5 qi3rrf%^ 
^TTg^q ht^tF?’, ?Tmr #q^qr Trnrr, 

?Tc^ f^^Ticrqr^, q'SRift ^rr^qj^qc^fT ?^qTr!TTcqrq’:, q^q 
qrqr q q^r^Fr, fq^mqi#«jr 1 q^rfq ar^q^ f^qcqr 

—f%qqqqqqqF^, ^rqr ^qrqrqrfq^gr fqq^ 

3^1?^ ffh- 3r?c7qr5E^?:or65«fg(qTf^?ft?5TFq^qT 1 

^^^qqj^Tqrgsrf^q^ ?rl^qr^q^i% ?f#^qcTpd^qq^q- 

qr: 5qq>q: qr ^qjq^q ^qrqq^^qFt^- 

®qq^q^qjr qq—wc^^q ht qRqqjft 5rf%: 1 q|Tfjj^ 

'^rqjqtSfq' 5rqc^ fic^q 5Tf%qR5 l' 

I qq: fqq^T; I qf^ 3lTcqqt qqq: fr^SqTqr 

sq^JHr^ '^iqfcrqqRT cZf^^SfTqq ■^rq^s^I —3:ffi|^t|H|^4'Hirq 





^ I ^ cTFTt: 

1 3T<^iTi^qfq srfqq^^^^f^^qr- 
qf^^TH^q tq^qr^ i h =q ^f^TT:, sr^ffw^q 

?^cqffT 3T'qc3riqT?qTri, sTTq^q^, ^q^’q^qqfq^qiqTqfT^^TTJTT 
qmi^q^q TT^?iT, g=5^vTT^^qmqTq|'q sFT^fiT^?^ 
=q ^'551^1 ic^ ?q^qTqfq:9nqiTqq|q^:qfq^^'\ ^^^if?- 

^q'T ff qfq:'j'q^Tqq^q:q’q^Tq^^rqqTftqqn' qq i irqq> fsftqtqT- 

‘.q?HT?qf;fq: f^q: l' (f^. q. ^l<^v ) 

?fq I qqr 

fe l’ (f^o^o W^ot^) 

?fq 1 

'|:%rq qfqq^T^q ?qqfq tjfq^rqqTcj; 1’ (f^r. q. M’^.) 

??qifq 1 sstqifq^^qt ff fqiqcqqrqTqicJ^qTc^ 3T?t)«iT q??q^- 
?5i^^qq arqtqTf I qTq;^r^q: qsT'iT^qqf qq ^qq^q^qi^qi: 
fqq?q^: feqiq?^ q'tfqfq^qr:, qqi qr t^q q^cqq;iFqq:qi?q- 
qstTT^^q^qT; qqpi2q-qR'q-5rT?qjTfq^^ qjqg qfq;q:rcqqqq- 
cH^fqqq^wT^qqiRT: ffcqif^iq; Iqqic^q qqi^qr qq;?:, 
qqifq^qR#! ^qq:|;^qvT|r^qiqrqqrT^qTsj i qqtq;^ 

‘qfTs^ qrqjqqqT.i’ 

?^qifq qqqjTir 

‘qr trq ^q^q?q q^qq; qjrfqqTf^qii: ll’ 
icqifq I qq^qq 5 arqfTqrq^q^qi: fqiq^q;T‘< fq^^sPq f^fq- 
qeq^qr^ qq ^q Fqf%qqq?^T 5 ^?qqT qt^q^iqrqi fqqjeq- 
^q^TqrqT 5r^Tq^T2q%iqq fq^q*q?q: qiqTf^qqi^qq^- 
^rrqqifqpq: 1 qqtq>^ 
















iT^T^^T TTt^F?^ g|q|: I’ 

I ^2TT 

I ^«iT 

q.?5TFq^cefFq^1^ q^: q^: fqq; |l’ {?q.q^T. ^1?^) 

?F^ I ?T7cr?q^qT: m qq 5ftq?qTR^m^TFq?q: i qqr 

'q?r c^qrq ^qt:p:qt i 

Fqq=5^^ ^TtqqcTTfrFq ll’ (?q. ^f. 

?Fcr 1 ^^q^qqF^^rq =q qqiq^q—qqrg ^^qrf^q fF?i^ ^qq* 
qqqFqfqqr^^ep^cfrg Fq^?qtsFq ^qqqiqt qofTTfeqqr^sqq^- 
Fg'f^qqrs^^fqq^sFq q qiqjqq q^j^cq^T 5rf%q^ fjq^, qe^ 
^?q qTqjqfqfqqjc^^q^rTqq^q tqqieqicqqt qi^: ?q^q 

I q q Fqqr^qr argqqr^ fqqreqifq^rsT Fqwi:, aiFq g q 
qq q;q>; ^Tq^^g^fqqvTTq'tqTTqwsq^^qqT^lFqqFq^TTqqqsq^:, 

q^q #q^tqiTqJrq q>^:, qg q qg^?:?q^qqF^qrqrrq qq^tfqq 
q^^qq?: F^rqicqFq qqfqqrq^r qqqFqq^rfq^q^fs i Fqq't i| 
q^qr^qqq^rqfqq^qfqqFgqq: q^rT^qftF^qgqr q^qqqqiqr?- 
qgqFqq^T qgqr g^q^ qqr Ff qqqrq^qqF^K^^qrqr qg qg 
argqFq^rfq qqrg q^;qqr¥iqFq qqf^igqpqqqT'^iqr qiqrcqqr 
^qq^^oT 3 tt?^ qg aftsr ^fq q;«q^ i q^ qq^^g argqiqqjqqi 
qqFqqqj^q^qc%q qqtsfq gq^Fq qqq^rqqrqtF^sqsi^q q^qj- 
^q ^q^rsqrFq srgqFq^rg f^qi^qi^q qg q'tqtsTtq’^q^rqTq^y- 
q^qqt qqfq i qqtq^g 

‘arr^yiqTg qmq^qsqfg..ii' 









c 

?Ti^irF^^'TTr?frTr'i ?T^’mfftJT^?i?35r«^r?^'Ji^5TTq; 

^'t^r:, qlrjg^i^irrT^iEftq^r^ jfg^fsq^ifr ^r 5 ar^'if fTTf'T 

3rntT?r?iTTfq 3T^5rq;T55q;F5y^fq??qqq5T^in^q^^ qfr^'q^^' 
?frq?Tcqqj ?^ra?5iRRf?^r^qjf 1 qq^ift^fq f^ 

q^q^rtmcqqjq^fq^rqfq^^qq^q^ cr^ gjqqiFi ^q% 1 

qt^q qq^qt^rf? 1 sr^qqifq ff^s^ ar^qq; qfT^'qVrE^r ^ 

^^ag^qic^ I qqr q qstq^^qq^qRT^^ arf^sr- 
qrqqqrfqqq'^qfq^ftqTcqqiqqqTqfqrqi qrqi’JTTqTf^Tq TqfjftJJ- 
q^qqqt^qqfq fqqNqtqqq^qrqqjTqj^q^^yiftciqfq q g^orf^r??- 
qqqqrfq qqr qqr q q ^qj qqfq qqr qq? qf^fqqqqcq?T^q^' 
qqiq^ i qqqt ^ arqqcqJT^ aiq^q; arfqqiqqcq^RT^^r qq ^' 
aftqiqn q|qqqr 1 q?tq qq^'tqra'fR'qTqfq^f^rqrqf^' 
ffqiq'tq^^q fqq, q^qq qifqqqqqfcqsqr I li’tsFq qq qq 
qq?q;R:, arfqozrqffqq qtrq qfqqT^qg^rfq q"tq?cqqt q^ 
qTqqTq^q^qTq5?qif?qt^q ^tq^qq? fqqjrqqrq^ jqq vrfq^qfq 
5fq ^^^^qq^qfq^qqqfcqvqifq |:^qqrqq I q|^q 

‘|:Mq qfqqJT^q..l’ ( F^. q. M«.) 

?Fq I q?T qqjqFfqqqrit^qq^rFqqF^^^q 5 q^rq^jqq^ftiirq- 

qqrgqq^ fq^r^FwtqqRRrq qFqqqr^ q?r ?i^q't Iqq??^ 
qft5q?q5lFTRq^Fqq!ai|?qiqqqq?s[q^T|q^!q — qF?^’if^qTq?5' 
^q^qrqqqtqTgq^sqq q?q|Tq?qq'tqTqqqrq5^qqicqqT 
qqrcqq5Fq?q?:^rf55q?:qqiqTFq5qi%: 1 ^snFf q^q^qqj^^qeq 
qqqfe^rqrqtsFq qqtqf^qr^qq^sqiqs^q^q q^^qq^r^ eqj^' 













q5R^re«T5I5rdTF=Ig?I^ 5r5f«l5Tr*l>I%5TS[T^'»T 5?Tfcr iT^m?^- 

^fgTn^F?:q>T^^S5q%^: 15Ts^ir% 

'5^: ^ .I’ ( 'T. ) 

fcqrfe I ^2IT 

‘qr«iT ?qqt«T^t5R«r:.i’ (q. ^1r. ) 


frqrf? i fi«n 
<•••. 



ir ( q. ) 


Ic^tF? I aT?q?ITfq 

sqwcq^^sfq %%F!iT ll’ (f^* 's® ) 


?% I ^qqqr'ift ff ^f^q^f: ?R?q^ifj^ ^ qt2mT?F5iqq<T- 

5qqi5iF^qTF55q;iaF?iF^fr^^: ^?^^q5rT^?q5r?^Tqsfq 
^.rq»?q^??qq>q\q^^q5T^ i?qF»i5iT^«q i 
‘5rF^?TqiTO«ftii?5Tq?qT%5nq^rifqq>?( i 
qc5?q ^Tqq^[^ li’ ( ) 

^cT • 




fF^ =q I q^i^^or ^qqai sqt^JTifq 

‘q»T qtFqJT^^^ 5TF?q^ q^ I 

•^^fpnr ^TRci ii’ (uit. 

iFer qt5r^ I qtqTq5=?qTlTfq FqaiFq^'^ 

‘qqqcqr T3?«iTqi: sRq qt:q»qq^sfq 

qfqqq^q^^nfqqr^q’ 









U 

?fcT \ 

‘3T5^< q^tf^spr^fg? 5TT^iTT^'n ii l \\ 

^^ siq^t \ 

■3^ w ■3^ T^F^ri j-ci^Mmfr^HH-i^ 

3Tqq;S3 1 3T?I ^ tT^3 aiq^’ ?i^fcr 3^N^T^q?qJF- 
I qT3rTR^IJTqir^?Trq>TTq5TrF55?ft ^q^cft ^sFqgq 
f^^tiTT HRRmfaf^rqSTrcT'^t^^^^T^^T^T ■>T^% ^FcT, iTTqiFq 
Fq^^ q^^q:, ?tt ^q^jq^^q srqFc- 

^TqqTq?qT3 ar^qqTiFfqfq^fiqq^qqT^iFq^lqqqcqT^ q^iq^T 
?Fq qq =q q^^q: ^sfi^iq Fq^w Fqq^iq 1 qfq^^ 

‘m fqq^qr q|TFq?ii Fqq^r qq^q^qq^ 1 
fqqqqq^qq q^qr^ q^qqf^qq^^ 11' 

?Fq I qqi 

‘qt^qq:; qqr^'tqr: qqiqiqqqiqq: )’ 

c 

?fq I qqar fqsqr q^T3^Tqr ^sFq^rifqqq^qr q^iqFgj?qrpf 
5iq53i;q^ri> ^qfq ‘q^-3T’ ^Fq q^ qq^ 

q^r^ I qqq qq; 5qqFqF5S^q?;q:qTqT Fqq^f^q ^qiqf^q, 
qT%fq: ^q^qqcjqqfT^qR^rq sricqFqq^Fq^qiF-q^qcq, qqsT^r^q 
^qrqiFqspif Fqqq’?:qig;q?q^q=qqcqJi'^Tcq sr^FqFq 1 qqtq:^ 

'qqsrq^qFqFq^iF-qq^qrq^ F§ q^fqq: 1’ (ar. q, Fq. ) 
?fq I q^q 3^3 arFq^l^qq I qqiF^—qFgq-^q qqr aiFq^qT- 
g^Tgq^qFq’qpq't q^qq^T^q;: qqi^q^rqi^qtqqvjq: qq>q 
qrrqrq5tsq?~5Tcqq;:, q qq qqquqqi fqqq^qqrqq^qiq't 










H<^^u| ■g;eTrd I ct?ncRJc^f^^JcWR- 
Jj^^^q?T5^^a%5r: ?i^?T, 
^fqsir^ ^ cT^^ arf^^-?: i 3 r|— q^iTT^5=?^q 

3T ?frl ^q ^ Sfqsrqqqiq I 

^5qT ^^Tq^rqTqrqi 3 tr?^jt bt^^', i lari^^q, 

I q^'t qqfqqtPqSqqjTf'^^llT 3TTq5=q'n^^ I 

STTqr^tffq BTTTp^qj sfcT ^T^Tc^^qiniqq^if qif^iqr^qJT'l'r^^ 3Tf^- 
qq^f^ifq I 

‘?fqtq^Tfq5F: qiF^Tqr^qjM: l’ 

I fqqFcf ^ qcf^ srt^qqfequm^ 1 qrsrq—q^T?r- 

q^qcim BTfq^^ f^sT^nrq q^qf^if^fq qTqqqq-qq5mg;q'jTq 
Ift^iq 1 qqt^‘ ai^i 

‘Tj^f^l^q-^ WT ■^; 'H<ir^|B^: l’ (^o 6 

^cmf^ i qTT^|TFrq;TqT5=q q5q??qif?^T5i^q fq'n'M qr^t^ • 

^^ wcq^q qcqqTcq?Tqf?qcq?q ??^Tq?Eq qn' qf ^ 

BT^fqfq I cT^T f| qq ?q qiq^ ?Fq q^ qrqq, q^q ^qq^'- 
^q^fq sr^qTtqvqT^:, q jq: qTqq^qqqf'^'q^q 

q^ 3T ?^^qsq qq q«Ttqj qiq^ i 

‘^feqqi fqt^^jqFqq^Rq ^T^qi 1 

q? fq^qrfj^qfqqq: qts^fqcqq^ i|’ ( q- q- Fq- X '\) 

^Fq I q-qqiFq 

'q^tsqFqcq«IqqT qiq^q'fFq^Ff.qt i 

q^^5TFq»^TcJrq qiq^ q F^qqqiqi n’ 

(fo qo X\\\Ro) 













I ffTSTf^f at 

I sr^rnFvt: faqfeafiif^ i a«TT ^qinr—a:s sTf^gqra 

^ o 

ai? ffa, 3T|?ar^tq;^qRia; a f%fa^, sqfaf^^- 
^^^qT'Jiqaqsfqtfq' fq^q a ^fa i qn^aRa^^fsTaiar raaiai- 
qj^Tat sraa%afeaT =a a^rfa a^fa oafaf^a; arffa, aarfa ^a- 
^RaraaiaT ^ai^a a^aaa^ afewaT^^ ar^ara^fe: aaaTf^c^ 
g: I a|aj aaa 
‘a^ fqjaa a^rfa ^aar 

ai'^aF=a 3r¥5T?a^sFaai^ i 
a>r fqiaa aarf^a aafa- 

ra^^t ^^^raaiafa[ ii’ 

I "^^raa t’a'-^d^-ii1c^ia 3 t^ ararsilH^- 
inaa, apR. 3i^%a ara ^chii^lch^acaict i 3 pr^ 
srfaiRTa araTa fHrair^dcaici^ al^g 
^nfer, ^ awit 5 trt ^ i ar ^naar ^nddiRdi aa i 
wi^iyH<Hoq 5 di la ai^ saa aaa ■?!% af^uapt 
I ■qaa^ % aararfa^qaFKsfq aa-arfaara a.a ar^ar 
37|[aa^a?aTa^ I aaa a^Ta^Riaicaa a;a ii^v ii 

?q%a arfe>^fa^fqaTa-aq5aaTcqaaa|q qag^ aafa, 
?Fa faa^ Fa^% 

5 m 5if^: 

^^Tfqqri I 
at Jr aran %%5 t 

^ ^'cT u ^ n 



























qt qfcTgTPTT^r ?if^?Tcrr 
f^, FfT5T?^TcT?’qq5r?q^^T 3^1—F^F^^TpiT ^2TF?5TRTffT, 
fic^en ITT ^rf^:, JTTfiiqJT 

^T^a[Tfq^Tt, ^T^Tr?^q^T=^q5?ir ^q>T^r, rfTF<q?^«fiJTT^=q^^q 

q^aj-Tnjqq^qi 5r^?T?«IHf.f^q5Tfe^TcqT 3?f?cT I ^ 

^i-f?5^qr (^^^\ ai^^^qr) i jtst ^iq*Tf^Rq 

rl^ q^iITiT?^: arf^^ ?TT qTlfe^t, ff 3T^^qq5T5T* 

^STT ^qfcT I 

‘arfq i’ ( ?q. q^r. ) 

I cTSTT 

‘^?Tq5^:?T I 

sr^^?%sftTq5RTq q^T'qn'tq' qffqiq ii’ 

( ?q. qiT, R\\o ) 

?fcr I fqr^q sriiTf^qi^ i ^?ir qjqq fc^Fq 

q5F=^ 5qt?Ttrrm??qT^T:, 5irT=qeT^ =q cfc^; ?F^ I qsr 

q;«jq ^fT qfH q^RT^Tf^irq^ qT»TTgTTF?T^Fcf?qTc!?5q^j;?iT ^^Fir 
?F?t ^TiT-qpT: i ^sTTfir ^ciiFq qrs: i ar^F^rcq^q ?T#qJTfg^r?q- 
?Ri^ q^mqir^, =qr rr^rrFqF^^fq^qtqt^q q?qF»T5riq‘ 
Fqfsiqt^^^q qFTg;'jfvTTqiFcRq;r qfe Fq??F^ iFct rt^ Rq^Fs^^R i 
^ftiTRT??qR: ?qFR^^> 

‘f Fq arqt ^Rff ?Trq^’ 

IcRTF? I 

?F^ qrg ^Ri FqqmFcf rtr^t 

TRF I 

fqqnRRRfjR ^RT FRRT^fR^ ^ST-^ 

SlFqRR ?RT RqqSRT5?RT SRRlf^RqTcTTRRI^ II 













sm^Jim apta fqp ^jr^rp^iar^aa, 

5Tra;R^I??I-zi P^3T 

aiRi, ?5st>ira^;qra ^ siJjci i 3 t^ 

aRRtfpf: 

qRT pfacapTfa^ ?a^qa: i 

q^=5sraf^rTc5qqT -qTq^qTfq^f?^ ii 
a^RTt aa^^fnc^ aTa^qpnf^^qaT i 
qTTq^Tqq:i^qq5qRmf?£r5^fa: ii 

a?a aaq:iq:R^a^qqf^R5TRi5 i 
■q^HdM ^^-id ^ cpqwd^Fqfpqt ii 
cTPT y-FTT^v-t wqwm i 
wi II 

a^Fqq:afq^^TTtiiRa?aTi 5 a: 1 
q^ar^^RTR^^a^T^qi^'q q|: 11 

3 T?a^'ffqarq;^<Taa< aq,: 1 
a%qqa^^ 11 

c c 

qa\ aaqia^T^iqqJi^qifeat aa: i 
atq^q?r%? a^a a^ata^Rpqi^ 11 
ala qq:a5paP5fTq;aaTF-aajq 1 
q^aartaq^a a^a: ar^a^qa^ 11 
qfqiaa ^-<% f 

srfa srifw ^'T^q^raq; 
ara^fa^^a 

Ifa Faaf^a 53; a i 












?n?{%3r qf^^rf^ 

3;3r^ 

q| 3 t^3^ II 

^^^?qTcq?T^iT n ^ n 

o ^ ' 

f 5'5TtTr?Tgf?s?^: \ 

^mflT g^5TTf^ 

^fX: ^f?y?pf?Tfe^T \[ >{ W 

qr^qq; I 'flTqt q^m:, ^T ^q^rqT 5^q8RI- 

qT^'tq^^TT^srt^^q ^sqqrqi qT^^r^q'Nqq|Tq^ql wF^t i 
JT^C^—q^qq^l^q^qi qT?I5tsqTf^qr^q5f:q: ^ ^^^^. ^W. 3T5T:, 
qi^rt’^Tt ^ifTp; 3Tq?^qEj^i^qTf?^Ttqqfq^ I q|T^—q^^iiFq- 
^ciT^fq^qt ^TTqt fq^TiqqjwT^r^ ^q q^m:, ff 

qfq^q^qq^rfqj: 5Fq?qTq?5qtqqFf?q^pft?q^qEPTifqr^gjq?c% qfe- 
I q|qj «ftqtqTq-?qTl: 

..arq^Ff^rlF, 

qr 55 ^ qqfqqq^qqF^qq^ 1 

qtqqq g?q f^iq^q q?T II ( F^r. q. tR®, R'a ) 
?Fq I viTq\ q q^ 3TF?q ?Fq q^qqfqiq^T^qcqqF^q qrq- 

5T5^q fq’q^ ^qq=5q^ 1 Fqq# q q^Fq qfT=5Sqts?qt?q5qq5#^^q 
qqFq ?fq qqiqicqqiFqqqFq^q't q5iqq5TrqqTqtsq^^j:qTT^:qT- 
FqFq^qfqqF 3T^q5r?^q, q?qq sq^Fs®??^ ^qqiq^ 







I ^<nr?T;5ir?: 

iftq^ I zrfe 5 ?T^Tf'T 3T?cT?3iTrq STgqF^^iT^ 
rT^JT^^fhf^T 'Tq:iTT?TJ=^TF^:?r | ‘rj^^q-’ 

3gfog^qfq:^'ifr?Tq:»f55ffTq;^?^fcrf5q5fq?H??tTq?!T ^T — 

^Tm: 3T5TT ^Tcr: i q^ fq;55 5 ?# ^c^; 

fq^TTf^TTfil 3i2q%5TT^ ^«TrstcqriT?TcTirr %q|q3t 
qiR^ I rT|rfj VJfqRraq^T 

'^^'tq^scqir q't qRRTq’-?: I 

^ ^ ^ '^ciHH-<^MKH II (q^of^o 

5f^ 1 qT§;R^R ^T|^' 'R^St' 5 % ^q q?qT: I 

qT^'Q^^JT ff ?q=qiTc^Rfr^^ 'arf^' ?% qj:, q^q 

=q qTpqgTftqiT^qrq^ 1 arq qq qq q q^%^ qq 
5^1'jftFq—^fq’qr^qqi R^qi q^qr: ^rqqqjE^jsqjfqqi^q- 
^q??iTqqifTr%fqg^qiRRTTqTqq^qq^^qT3qqrqRq ^qiq^^q^ 1 
^q fqqr qj^qj^y^fRrsqfq^q J^joq^Fr—q ^fq o^^^ 

^rfq i^Hidi I q>eiqidHi5ild'HqA'^ 'g ’^H^heHlHld cr^ ^ciIhRi 

sqq^TT: 1 q?3q?3 h q;^««qFq: ^A^Tq^iJR srgqfq^Tq q qq?^ 
argq^qq^ qqi q %3 qgq^fqf^qj^q qrqiq 1 qgq- 

fqqqrqq^iqt q q:^q;?y^q =q qq^TT^iqi^q 3T3cq%; ?qT 3 — 
qfeq^t^qvr^^jqqqiRrs^^^ ^rsuqtqqs^qiTqr argqq^: ^- 
I qqqr q qoi?: qqj^qrqq'ss?,^: qr^sqjq- 

?i®^r'qT: I q^qqfqqiqqrqt^qj^q rq>q?qTq?5^q^RT 

?fq qqj^dAq sr^ qqqt^ l qq!?5?f ^ vrqq^ q^r 
qj^fq I q|qi^ 

qqiqjpq q^ q?qT: ( ?q. qJT. ^l?o ) 












5ciTiF? 1 F^ ’*i'iftFd q^irf^ qF^ ’i^rF^r ^c^rF? ^rqqfqi 

5^qq I 37«ft^^ 

‘^?T ¥q ^q5i5T®^ q qqq^ i 

i^^qq fq^TqiFq Fqjqq qF^F^r^q^ li’ (q.so Ri?i^) 

^Fq %?r?cr q'?;^r'a^oT i q g ^q'q qiq ^^^qj^jq^^Tcqqjqr^q^qqr- 

Fq^qqq?q;af?iJrq I qqiF^—^q^rT’q^ qq «ft?q=50??5TT?q 

qqFqqTqFqqqTqq^ qq^q Fq^Fqqqiq 

'sTRqqr ^q^ q?g q qqi^F^Fq ?qq: r (^q. q. R\Wk) 

arq Ff qtjqqrql srR^q qrq^: ?cgq;q, ^qi^rF^qq^q- 

^sqrqt q^qtsgsrFqqq'tqFq^Titq arFqFq^qqFq sqs^tf fqqjs- 
q^qfqq^jqqqqFq ^mFqFq ?RT5qqTq%^q i 

'qt: q^q^ q^g q^rsqtsq^ q^fqq: i’ (?q. q. ^i?vv9) 

qq: q qiq Fqq^srFqFq^rq: q;F^g ^Fq i q^qqTgq^fq- 
qrqqtq^Fq^YsgqiFqqq'tTtsFq srrcqq qq ^rqof ^qig q q^^q, 
qeqqrqq^rq qqg qqir^—q>q?q qF^^icqqrqrqrqrg i 
^Tz^Fqqrqrg Ff ^^sqqf Fq^q^ qq, q q qq qi^qFqqrqt 
qiirqTqf%qq?q: ^qrg i qtgifeqqqqFq q qq qaiMsg^Fq^qg, 
srFq g ?:qTcql%grrq qTcqJiFqqf qf^qrg, qic^iFq^F^qFqFqFqq- 
qj^sqiqi^TFq^qTqt^ ^js^qrqq^^qrqq^qq't’t g q'jfFqcq^TqFq qF? 
qm «q^qr qiw^q qrwsifqFqqjit f^ri^iFq^^q'q ^qig, 
qqqi q^: sqq^—iFq t^^qq^q qqg, ^qrq qqqsrgqqq^qr» 
tq qrq^qqqtitq 5TFq.^qqqtq5r i q^-JiiFqj-F^iqi^qqj 

Ff ?q qq Fqqj^qrrq i qq qg ^q^ ^q^qFq srqF^qq qg %q^ 
^^^qqtFq g^iqqqr q^icqqt ^z: FqgFq fFqqg, qq qq qqq- 
g^Fqqq: ^q: I qg jqF^qFq^qFq vTiqqiq, qqrq^^qqT’qqqT 






5CIT=5^5^oIiq^5Zf rT=5^^ 
^'T, ^ ^8% ff iTcr q;'? 5'^rr=5^5grT«f:, srrirf^'iTfiT^ ^ i 
q'ZTT f^grf^ arqqfq ^frT I rTfzrrfq 3T?iTg;qT- 

^f^??fT^^IT^=qqcf:TT?^ra?’qfrr^f5^nli=^qrq^r^^^ srfvriTfqTfr 
3Tl?F8q%, J7«Tr^?T e^qf^^fcT, qq^cft q^mi I 

^iqqr 5q7M=50?qqqcq5Ri%T^^ffqraf5qf|f^qq sr^ f^giftr ?% 

qTTq|Tf?;q^t?q:, 5^q^, 

'IRqT^fr^^s|q^^R:r^^q i 

3 T 5 ft 5 f 5 Fir =q afq^i: ii' ( q. qt. ) 

I qq ^qq^tsfq ff arf^rr 

i m arqf^^q^ 

5i^^qq cTT|.cqfq<t5qi^3; i cT^qq\?5i fqqaqrcqq? fqqicqqr ^qi^ i 
qcT qq qtq?qT?q ^q^tfq^iKTcqqj^q fq^f^q 3;q qr'^qfq^it— 
q^qiqqqq^^q fq^q^ arqgq^qr^ i ^q^r^qi =q qroi^sqfifq 
q fq.rqc^—^i.'^qqqTqqqqeq^rq'iq^j^Tfqs^qmiq^oqqf^gTq 
q Rqqf-q q^qiFq=5#q^qT^?qf:, fq^s^fq^sfq ciqfr^Fq, 

3iq qq ‘3 tF^^ qcqq^^’ qt^ \ t^qqq^qifq^qi^q qTiqTTFq- 
qrfq^qfqiT^Tc!; q^qTqlq?^ ^qq^r^ i qqiF^—?q?qrq?5qtq. 
qjf^q^iqqiq^ arq^q^r^TT^q^aqq Fqqsq^ 'srrqr ^qt qq 
qq’ ^Fa =q \ ^q=qqmT?g ^qar ^qqF^^qFq a 5iqqr:—F^|;qfq 
saiFqqiaT^qq’q: i qq F^ qq?cq^FqFa a^i^iat srFq cqqj- 
daiff^Mi: war-^-t^q^ q^—1w- 
F^qm^ qqiFq, 3i| =1^ q^fir ^^qFq qata: i ^riqjqFq ^cq^sj- 
’^qqfq aTiaqqsat qqa qq- ^rr^^sqgf^iTcqT, cq qaqqtq- 
^iF^jF^fa 3Taiq?qunftitaTFq qFaq^: i ^qrFacq^a 'qi^r, q^q' 
^cqTfqqcqqFq^^TqTTq^qtFqaa^RqspqqqjqqFqqqaqTFq qat- 











I cJI=^5rT^.^q?FmPT ^ 3T^^q%^TcH^c?ilfq ^qicj; 
c^5r^ 3T^ vrq^rf^q q?irqT^ i f^^^^^qqFq ^ 
^F^sicTfeqfjq^ -.q;:iTq^qTcqq: i q^'ts^, 

3T^ 3r^, fjqqi ^^^, sr^t %K^\^ ff ar^fqf^ nmi^cqr- 
fqF^jjvf ?^TrT?5if, 5 FqF^y^^ 5!??cTr vrq- 

arqTRr i | qq;rqq5TT^^q-q^q5f qq 

F^rq^q, fqi 5 g;qqcqFqqFq:qq^q:q I %q qq:^q qFq- 

q^qr 5rTq;-^t^q^q:qTfti ^rq^qr^q, q 5qqq^f^q 3nfr5<jf 
?5^2qq1rFqqq^5 i srcqq^FqsrFqsi^qqqT ^qRqq^cqrq; qqj-Fq-q|^q- 
^Tfqcqirfq fqq^?^ i qqs F^ 

‘qqr q?5 FgqT Fsqr -J^qq^q^qi I’ 

?Fq I crqiTcqqjc^ F^ srqfqq'tFqcqi^ F^rqqi, qFqq'ifqqq% ^irq^eq^a;, 
BT^qjqiqt ^q crq qTRq^Tiq qq^^qq qq: qs^ qsi: qsqsqrqrqT 
?cqFq F| FqgFq Fqgq: FasFfq §Fq q I’^^q FqjqT^rfq^^Fia^rq 
!^qc^, qqtqi 

‘q^q^itqjqT fJcqr qq q q=5^q q^qqi^ i’ 

?Fq I qq qq q^i-^iF^-FqiqRqqt ^qq^qjq q^m^ 
qrgq^q qq—q?qq q^^jq: q^q^^iq^q^rq, q q ^q q Fqsq:, 
q q qr q bi^ q fqgrq: iFq q^Fqqsq qq sr^qq^q^^T'^sn: 
5rTf^q%^^7q^5qTq^, qqi q Fqqqiqiq^^qiq q^q^i^^q 
qjqiFq q srqF^r^q^ q^^R^sFq^iFqq qqiFq qq^q qiqfq'p* 
qjq;, q=qq^q5g- ^iqi^fq qqtFq qcqqtFq'?:??^^^^ 

qq^^^Fq qq^qcqqqqq^q, qqtqj qqq 

'q qi qtqt q f qqqqqT^qt’ 

^Fq I qq qqqr arf qqJT qqq^Fq:, qqtq^q 



‘?r ^TtF'T f^^qfcl: I’ 

q^ir f?«i^r i 

^«TT ^ ^f«i^T 5mt: 5Tiq^Tt ii’ ( nr. fq. ) 

?iq:-5rfe-f5TqT%f5T rq’q^rcTcqS[T It«TcT1^ 1 
=q eq^Rr ^ ii’ 

itcT I cf^ ■qr^TftTjf^RTfR^ ^ryeyrdMrTlfiy<l4'lH<^V 
^V. ^rf^: Fqq 5 qfcTqfe^q: 

qg: I q^5ir^qRTqr^F^cT^f5q^fl^5q?frq^5Tq^fwqq^frf?q- 
^rf^oqr qq^T^q^rqciTT l s^T^qi^ •5*J'q tfq’ I ‘^^Rqifq’ 
%fk, J7|^—q^«rq5TT?:fqFT, srfhq^qqj^—gfiq:5Fqifq #rqf|- 

3T5^t, qR'^qjJr'q ^^^Rfq 3f5?T?:cfRiR^#q 

qFiiqr, 3TcT trq ^^qfq ‘arqi?^ q^’ ( qr. ) I 

^q ff 3TqTqcicT^Tqq5^^¥q^q i srq^^^^q't 

fqcTTr^rq sr^^^qqfj^^riq qqr >T%c^ I qqt€ 

'qq:5qq^rfq q^ qR^rRITtfRcT: ^V. I 
^rqq 5rqq% qig q^ft qq: q^' ii 

?Fq I qqi ^^^RTfq q?qqTq?q ^^Tfq q I 

q5q?^T 3Tfq qTTqiiF^qjRi: qqqq?Tq:cqrc^, ^^Rqrfq q 
q?tq?q q^qy^: I fq^^q^inFqqq^q 

^t^git^FqPTij^l % ^7 Mrr^fe: - 

f55Tf^Tcqr arqp 5qRqR> fqqtqqRcqR; fqfq: qirqfg^qt 
qqfj^RRqgqrfq^fsqcft q^qi^qqq q^^ 

‘.?Tr 


; 













I ^«iiF^ ^ f^rg^r'iT^^^:^f^str^crwdiFc[i?zii^??ziT 
qw q7?r>gil? srf^VTTit^^ ^<11STT^ | 

jRifq srsi^w^iaT- 

q^:, ^T^TTfq q^FqTT^TRTcirqjts^s?; ^rf^cT, f^q^T^rr 
i =q qfe ^ ^qrc^ qqtTTg^nrmife^^ 

ar^oftqq^Tqfq ^ ^^Fq^T^f^^^^Tq^rr^qTTJT^iTT^T- 

^TqSTT^ f^gfe 1 ?T cT^ STcTS#^: 1 

?T«TT JI5I ?qg: f^STTf^cT STTH: I 

?rqfiT? ?TTiTi?q?q?^F^?TciT?r: qrfeim: 

q^qi^R^TRif^ f5T^T^5 ^^rqcqi ^prfq 
!?rrTEqm% ?^5Fq^ 

^^TqrqTq i 

^qr?q?e^..’ 

iFfT 1 ftrqf^rqcZTR^ eiiri-qF^^TO^iqiicii^nFq q^Jl>a^- 
^q^5ftqTqa%5Tiq qqqj^ciT Fq^'^m'q 5q^q.frq 

^qq^qFqpqqq^Fq^'aqqrFqi^n^qg^T^ I ?q?q^^SqF?qq: 

'm f^5q\F»:q'—q^rfq fqq eqvriqHr ?«nq siFtsw*?, 

qt^T^qt ^ 3T?qq: F^Fqqq?q Fqcf^TTFqFqgiqT q f%F^c^ i q't^rfe 
^qfqfq qqig^q I ‘q^Fq’ sfFqF5s?r=qqcq;r^qfrqntfi^ ‘qq 
qt^ qiq^' q^q ^^rfq^qcqfqFq, q^q q^i^fq q>55T?R?q- 
q^iqfqq^q q^ siftrr—qc^ qqq?RRqqj fq=^ ^q—q*^q^ 
^q^, srq cqqjF^^fqsf^qqqT ^q^q sq'^q qq i crqr 
q^Tcq^q Fq^TTF^^qq^q^^qqrqrqt qc^ fqq qq^qqFqgiqrq 
‘srifqfe’ qRriFq sqtq q^T^^qq;^q ‘q ^ ar’ ^Fq q^Rq^ 55tq 
f^cqjqqft q-?Fq, f’isfeqt-^-qj^^qr qtq^, qft^Fq^if^s- 










qqj IW fS^f^^T I 

q^ qcf %t =^ ^ 

5)<!?qiqq STqq'fjqqtq^l^^'^q 1 

‘q^ f?«Tqfqq qqq ^^^T^ I 

fT^qRTfcT^qcqm Fq-^Vqtsf^q ^^Fqq ll’ (?q. q;r. ?R) 

?f^ I sTTq'rqi^^q fq^'tqqjTFqqmsfq q^'?:oTTr?^^^i?^'q 
qq^T^qnft ?feiTcqq^ q^ q^’q'?:: i qfq^qq fqqm: ?T#fq^q?q- 
slf^: 

1 3Tq 3TT^^ 3Tq:—qqrf ^rfsq^TT:, iTfiTiT 

l^oqtfiq srqf^qq: 1 qq q?qq qe^fq'STT^^^q^qH^ 

fq^cq qqTqsq^q^ fq.qRTf%^q5=qfqeq fq^qqfq ‘^qqTfq’ 
?cqTfq I q^ f| ^qq 31 qTTg^qTcqqqTq^ifa[qqq?q?cqTf^?i?:- 
qfTqT^TsfqFsstqrqTqTqTq: I qjqqrqtfq ^qqfqqsqq^^ q^r- 
■q|lf'<.q^'\qqqirq qiqq?q qiqqqq^q ^TT^^q^^fsp^TFqqi^q sjt^- 
qjqtfq, q|q:q 

..qqqar q:’ 

^fq 1 qqqqq;qqfq qqqiifT^Rqfq qcqjq^Tcqfq q q^Tq^T^qqr- 
^5fq qgq^^rqqqfqqiqq, qqTgfqqfqqql- q\qtqTq?qqT?T:-- 
qjqqrfq ?rq ijfr^qrfq ^f^r, q?TT|^q ?Tq?q srfq 

^«?q(^fq, q^qr^qifq; pcqq^Jirqi^qqt: fqqVzq f ^q^- 
^fjqq I ?q^q qr^q qr^^g^q ‘qg’ ^fq—‘q qq q 
^^qrcqrfqTgq^gqqTqqqi’—q^:, q^%q qq 'qq'—qrtfeqi- 
^fq^q, qFf qq>Tqrqq5T^q?:q?=q¥qT^^fqr fqifqq qiqrqr 
q^q I qqTqqpqTqF^qrqJTfeqT^qTqfq qqilgqr qTifqqqrqT- 
qfq, qqrqtit qqicqTgqqq:, qTqi^q^TqT^qT^qTqtit qrqq^qr- 












q^:, srsTiTfT ^arr fwrr^fsTtF^^sT^T^rFrJTc^^ gr#, cTc^ ^ 
?^;5iTr^rr5TVTTTS>TR>TfT^riTfcT ^ 1 % ^ 5 ^ 

JTW% Ifc?f F^m^rf^STTiTc^Tc^ ^ ?T?I fefq fTj^T^- 

FT?5r: I ?f?if?FT qsf-^ i sirtFes^^r^ 

‘sr^r^nrr^iT^Tit^ ^Tzp-Fcr?^??^^ F^ r* 

CN 

?Ft 1 s^r^qf^sFr 

..gr?F?cT q^iTT^fcT: F ( fq. ^r. ?IH ) 

?Ft 1 'ifl'H^iTT^r-^'TTl^Fq 

‘zTc^T^cqTtTT^ Ff q^lTT^\^rl: F^^: l’ 
sF^T fq^qg ^-15 1 rl|^F 

‘^t: .’ 

?% 13T?5q Fq^m^rF^q^rt F^r^q^FcT 5f%, 

sqr^qm FaFs: ^«nc^?TS^ ^Ft, F^ qr- 

mqqqT^T ^rq;^ f ?yTf ^tF^ ^r^rr ^t^Fct qd^imr^f ^«tt* 
cqqrs?! i 

'.q^Rq^^a: F^q;i^ i’ 

?Fr 1 3T?q^rFq 

‘%?r-#q cT^> ?5 t ^ft: i 

*Trf ^^SriFq F^qr ^TqffTJT q^ii^ II' 

?Fr I ^itFq^Tr^T^sFq 

'qmiTRfFfTF^TptsFq IF^qj: q^^rqf^ i 
?f?q5rqf ^frsFq f# qi>^ fw^sFq ^r: li’ 

?Fcr I ssfi^rqf^qr^sFq 

‘^iqiTTq^F>TF^^'!srq IF^rq^: qa:?Tr^Fq^ i 
q5iTT:^a:q^f#ij 5^: ?f^q:RiT|TeT II' 










ffrT I 3T?zr q^, qq 
^fq<j qw«f5T*Tr^^ i q^ft^ 

'qar ?Tqqqt qq: i’ 

fq:q|qT qq^rqT5^Tq5^T^Tq i arq crimH:— 

‘q3T^ qiH^srq^r^qqfT 

ffN 3T<5i^ I 

ff| ^ sT^qrq 

q^ 3 Tq^ 3 Tqfar^i ^;3 || 
qfT3TTq|q%3Tqps^|5[qf3q^qS5fq3f- 
=5t5|^^3T^rfq3Tg533;^gqif5?:rq5Tiq?qq- 
qtqjqq^lfTSrgifq^qfHfqqT^qf^Igg^q. 

?Ff^?;rqf^qfqqrqqqrqf^^q3T^q;^r|q?TT- 
fqd|^?qwq^q^qq^qT3Tqf?:3TTqg3T^Tq5q- 
^qcqqqqq^tffqarr^^^qsr^^^cqcq l’ 

sqi^iq cqq?qT qq ar^t: sqi^q ^T^qqqfq ^qqq I 
qqfq qqqiqq^Rfqi^^: fi^T qqfci, ^qifq 

q^qqtsq^^qq^qfqg qq qqrqi^ qiqq f55^q%—‘ar^^^q’ 
^^qrfqqi ^Tiqq 5^'t%q fqqfqqq; q^q: 1 'pq^qr' 

5^'r%q qfqsfqqq: i qq? ^q’ ??qq sFcrqqqqf^ '3^?qT- 
cqq^^q' f%, qqjq: =q y^q ^ ffq i arq qtq qqr 

qr^q qqifq q t f^qqcqicq% qiq^^^^sq^, dq qq^ 
q^qrqqqqtqqfri:, qqqs^iqsq q qqx^^—q qqy^qiqsjqr- 
q^qq-^F^:, ^?r^?q^qiqqT^qqfq^q =q sr^^^qqq^^sr^^q 







3rfTq%: I ^T^Tlff 555t^FTnC 

‘5^5f rrfraiff f^r^ T^mr. i 

=^ ^r ?rpf c^^?rT?R«iTf^ li' 

I «lt?I>TTJ15=?qT?r5T^fq35iTre?n3^IT^’^ 

I 

fcqe?^^|5qferTcTrJT?ft?J3;^JI^: I 
^^f^rHTiTT^cTf^J^srf^^T?!^: II 
?T?^irFTTfT?^qT5ft^f^^rqfi55?TS^: i 

^a 

sjTT^qmi^: sqJifecT: il 

qcitOT qfifeqi't 5r5iT^feT, ^ qf^Biq?^ 

^ \i »tF^q>, cT^qT3^^fqc3^^ I q>?cn^ ? 

q)«f ^ 3Rq sie^ts^^TTc^ ? q>«r =srT#qi 3T?q afegr ? q»«f ==1 3 * 3 * 
^tqj^qc^^ ? g^T?qT«^ 3 fI^filF 5 T, 513 3qcqTn»T- 

5q?rl5qFq'sq>q<ii^fqT^^'t^T^i'^f^q5iFT5^T3 fe'aiT^ afe f^cRq 
qq^ a?a\Fq q?qF^^, qqiq^^q^strfq^^T- 
fqqrqfqqi^qReqq^qiRT'qi 3 qq^r^tq^q ' 313 ^^ q>«i^' ^^arFq- 
qiq555tq;3q^FqqFq^q a^i^q, '5>J(5 Scqifeqr 5ErT«R^t^- 
fqof^q 3T3^^qqaif^qq5iTfq83ftq?3Ti>qTqiqi ?q^qr 1 

3i5f?qTq?qiq qq ^5aFqqF?Tqfq^^q1q«rq3ftq^— 

<^ 1 * 1 : I q^frTTq^^qqq^q^yqaoTTfqfqFqsqitf^qiqqafqfq^^ 
qfqT?q^qqq^%, li v 11 

eraqr 

3 i«n?nfeT«w: 




?TO f l T ?g^q i g | * IT: I 



Sr^cT^> W \ U 

c 

5^<sn?^Ti^ 'T^g \ 

»% SJ o 

TT^TT?^ II ^ II 

qliclliq^rf^^rgiuii 

^iTT'nTHT 'gggsrg i 
snf? 

^^‘Tsa^g IIV9 II 

CN 

^qqji^q' Tl?^FfT 

fqfn»TT ^ ^'5 tR«5H II ^11 
qtff!: ^TIT^TcTT 

o 

d^l^dH:iTl<Aci cbirdch^ry^MpHrd pmm% I 37?T cTcgfg 

r^f% ^l'^T3^T-q?’—gFsfeqq: l qufq =^ 

srT=^qf!^?T q\qfqjT q ^qTfq 

^qid^’qic^; q^iT^^ir ^i?q% rTT^-cq^qfq^JTfq* 
cT?^qr 3T^*5r5^qF^qq—3Td?dTq^^^q ^Trg^qfqfd 
qrqc^ i q 5 sr^fTqf^rvqrqriT^dsfqq-^s^qt^q—tr^qqfqjq^r- 







I 3 T?qzrT 

f^qfq qqq ^^qqtqiq^FT^r: l ar?^—qr ar^ 

qqq: q^5T: ? —q qdtcqHTqiq I 

^'tqlqrq^qqiqT: 

‘arq^T^:: f^iq ?cq,q^?qqrTK: l' 

^cmqqqq^f^q 3 Tsq ffq oqr^q^qfeT^, qq;!?:- 

^qjRqqsjTTfHqiqTfqqT^aT qqqtc^T% qqqqq?qTq^q?q,^fe- 

^qcq^^q^q^qic^ qqqq^q^nqq^qq^qTqTq^Tqq^q^TW 3{q- 

5 T 5 qiq>q I qi^qtfq: fqq^q fq^fqq^^—qTfqRT anq^Ri 

qqt q HT^Tsqqrq^TT: 1 ^?=5 qqT-fqqTnqqT^rf?qiTFifqT%q^ 5 f^- 
5 iqqf^c«^qT ^qq?q?q gfqqq^ 1 qfe^qqq^fqqfq ^^qrfqsn^'iT 
ar^qar fqqq^ I qq 5 q^s^Tqqqfq^qT^a^^RqqNfqq- 
55qTrq^fqq?qicqqfqqqTqi: fq'qf^'J qqqjfq^ srq^ qqrqtqi 

^ I qfe^qrfqqi =q qif^qaqTqfqspfe'^^'qRfq q%qfq qrfqpq^ 
qqiqtq, q 5 a?q^?5^^qjT55qar^Eqfqqq?^—ifa qi^qifq: 
Tqa^q fqqfsqq;^ 1 tTqq5qq5qaT5qrqsiqi =q qqqsrqqjq, ?qq>^- 
qrfqar i ai^^qr =q tjqiq^^TTqfqjnqi q|q^5Tqqfq arfr- 
rq^q:^5i^, q^qfqsqfqqifqqi i q^qq5q^Tq:—'ar' 

3ti?it ^qt ?q^T'qT^51 qfq qi qq^Rq ^^qt^T^'nrqq 3 t«i^ 
^qifqfa 1 ann-^Tsq^ qq q sqq^qrqrq qrfq qrqtcqrqV, arfq 5 
3 nq\ qi^:, qqTff ajqlqi qqfqt q^iqR^fqfTqfq^ fq'^q^, 
qqq tjqiqqiqfqq^ fqaiqfifqq qfq^qqf^q ^q^ 1 qfqqi^ q 
q^fq qqqq'Tcqq.qr qaatfq^q 1 at q q^^ra'Ct q^mirfqq^T 
^qTfqqfqqrqjtiqT^qqTfq'qfq q^qs^cqrfqqsi: q^irq^iqiif^q^Tfe 
?qiT 7 ,¥qi 3 ??q:sR^q aTTqq^atfq^qq^'qq^. q^nftq af^ 

qqi'^qfta' ^fa q^i’ij^q qqqt ataqTfqqi 






\ aSTTf^—=^TfT=^T‘ 
^ ^ 'TrTfrir«T%fT 3T^qTfJT?Tr ^'JT ^qurw^icq^TT ?r|:|:;l%<aT- 

|fxi5zi£iq>^'tqqTq^«iT^m tTf^f? w^:|7!:q^|Rq^Tcqr?T ! 

^^^\ 3lfer5rzq% irq, 

cRqcqq^qqj^:qRlJT?^rq^qqfqfqpqrf.c?TTq^: efqfqfq^^^fq qfcf- 
qrq-fq^ipqfqq^^q^qcriq^'Tqj^q q cq^fqqr i 

q?T^: «ftqie^EqRr: 

'd 

‘gfeqi^ qq^cfqqq:qcq55Tq: I’ 

wfq I cTq%q ^qqqTRrqj^q'tsfq srqf ^qcqT qq^q^— qq q^ 
?qerq«qf:p;qmTq>rfeqjrqrqvqrqFqqi1qq5rrq:^sqqr'qq^rrTq5rT- 

v\ 

qiHT^q^jqqrq rqdqTqqTfqqq^qjfqqjfqqr^qTqql^rf^fjiB- 
rqq;?q^qifq Fqfqqseqq^gq cf^Fg:q;?qq7qrq^5fFqq^q^^qt^T- 
^nqWTfqqifq qqfq, qqf f'q^^iqf^I^^^qqFq^ff^qqjqtqrfq, q’S 
^Fs^s^qqt^^qTqT^irqrqTrqqtfi q v^qfq q^qq^q^q^Tq^qf^^^- 

I qqfq =q qf^q- 

qiyqiFq ^sqrqqqtq fqfqqi^qqj qqqrqfq^5Tfqqqqt^Tfqfqq5eq- 

^^qrfq I q?qmqq;qTqqreTfqqTqqq%%rq qqqt^ ITTqq't^^q- 

^qqq(5,q^q ^rqq'tqqiqq, q^ ^YqgTcqqJ^q, 3T?qqT 
q qcq?qRr-od^ ^*l'^'qi?l3?fqTqigq'lq ffq qfqqr^q^ qfirq: 
?rqqi q. qfq arfqqj^ j:j srfqf^:^ q^qs^qf^qiT^rqq- 
^ ^qi3 "q q^q arfqqj^q^q^^ q^^riq^qfqq^qsqq^yq^fq^f^ 
^fq^^qqfqgqqirg;qifq;^q ^ 

^qqRqRSqqqr ^ Fqqr^qrqf ^ S^Fq^^ecf fqqi 




jft?it:, sr^^Tci?^^^ I ^ ?r%5TTf??»n:oitqTtt?^T^, 

?f%5nfe?*T^®f ^ cWT ar^vr^ f ^r:, ^r^yrf^- 

^ m qf^r ar^^rifw^ifwi- 

?f^r 3Tqf^f^^?q«[T^ ewfc^ I qe^sfq 

qteffq^q>?qF^n3ifrq^^, ^ fq^qjf^i^^rasqfq^rrq^rq- 
Jf^q*ra^ i ^ f^eqrqt 

^ ^ qqji^^iTfe^qjeq^f^mqqjTr^pq 
qr ^qifqqfq qr q^^, q 'q sqrffe: 
qi^i-^ q fqqit qi^qjT^qq't q qfq»q^«!5zir^%: i ?gT?q- 
qfqfq arfq fqqsrrqTqt Iqt^^rqTfq^qirq^qT: qf^r qqf^q i 
5 qf^^'5 ^STpqrfq^qr fq^qqjRii ^,^ i icmfe q| 
Prqfqqj^qqq^q, ^Fq fqi qq5qiqqqqjqq i qiq^ 
qqnf^ fqfqqtqfqqTTq^q- 

5qfq^p=q^qt fqfqqrqTqj q?^ i 
q?qt q^ytqq^q: q^^rf^qifq 

Tqift^q fqjqqrqq^ftqq^T ii 
5iTt^qTqT?V 'Rqqg^T^qrqqEas- 
qqT55tqq ?qf^?^5rfq fq^ I 

qfqgT *tq?qfqfea5qq^^Fqq^T 
q^ ^?q qfqqq^ 5q?|rqfkq ii 

qf^ fq;% 

‘iqi^lq^Pisqq ^ q^qraErmrqq: ^q:» 
q j,^ q fq ^ %fq: qi ^rnql^qq II’ ( ) 

5fq I 

‘trq^fqiqqqf^q qq- ^qiqq^qq-1 

q % fkm: qqqq«^c^ ii’ (?q* ®pt- \\^) 





qTT^lf^I^T 


^ I 

^«IT|: 

‘JT^WJTffT=E^rf^ ^?TTTT^^q5T^'iT^ l’ ( ITT. f^. ?R? ) 

o 

I 

T ^ 5IIT^I?T^I^, srd^S^lf^T, i^I^: f^55tq^c^il?lTTS9’ 

3T^TfTTT^ ST^TTR^q ^ f% %q Rf5?5- 

8^, qqrq^q'JTRRJrq 'tt%c^ 

?TfqfT:goqqq^;5^[q 

^q|qr^3T^'iTlTf55iaTrtiI55T^ I 
3T5rTf'i|3Trq|¥?3T^T'iT 

^5rJ:5^3T=5S5<jrT:3Tq535r II 

q^q TfiqqrfT qqtqTi^fiT: RTT^ff q^q?qrqr5q^|^:p;fqcq^q5q?^qTf5. 

fqfqfqsq^TqTnrgTrwfqqR^r q^qRfq^T^q^TTf^qrqqfeqRq;^- 
^[^qRTqrfqqq^q^tqqqqcqjT^RTTT q^R’R^^T:q^|r^^Trq- 
>T?qqfqqqqifqqT^qiTqq^iTrq?q^qT ^qRqfqR^qq'nrqufrq^Ti- 

•o 

q^^r^fgfiFqrq^TITtqqiiqq^IRrg^fTfi^lFcT-^T-q^qT '^qi?Jr’ ?Rr- 
fqqr qf^q fq:#? ^qqqr fqoj'fq^, | 

gjRfqf fq'iffqq—arqjRTfq-rqqqf?^ f^iqqtq, qiifq-^T?^ q^ifq- 
?nfts?q qqq^qj, qrfq-qT^q q^qTfq-^rsqr^q q^qi^qsiqj, siFq- 
tini=q qrqifq-qiqfq q^qf^qgqj, qrfq-qp^ STRrFq-^itqr^q qF^- 


qTr?-*T(?d 3f fh-5^qre?i qs^, qiz^- 

qrqqt qqiRRcn ^q*fTO-q>55T-*TTqT^if^ 

arPRqRqfJri %f^ ^ ^ 

qilt^qtsiqs^Rl^xqTr^, ^SIT ff— 
wqr: q^T^i^qfq q^qqf^^^ q% ■^^qr^qPr ti«»TcqpT, qsft^* 

‘aiT^q ^5^f^^?TfqS5: I 

f^rq: u’ (ftr. ?R) 

%f^ \ JTOt^ ^5^ 

‘ rc^o ^O ^ 1 :^) 

?f?T I c»q ^qirRf^q qqq^i^q Fsrqqr’JTT^ qtTqPr 

^qqq Sjq^T^ft'qT^q —(?-^«!T%?viTqT?qq5TTaTq^ qqJT^iqf^ 
q^Jt’qT ^q^fq 3T^^t%%q 3ir=5grqqFq i ^^HctKiPy^^r- 
q^TT ^fq€rmq\ PqqT eqPrqT, 

3i|?qqT aTRSRq ^qq^, q ^ ‘y.^q^^t* 

^^qj=qq^qi^^ Pi?iqqT5qqifq^^T^ ^q^qq?i%—3 tr®t- 
qqtqi^qq^^ qg^q qqT=5grRq5?tTfq qtqqw, 

qqTfq^’a^qtqT^qqf^'., qq^qq^^ ^ qjRoii- 

q^^TJiifw qq qff: qq%—‘ 

?tFqq <^q ^iqqq^qqqqTg^ \ ?qTcq^ ^ viFmm 

qqsT^Rqf^q sr^qrrqpi ^ 

srqqq^qif^H-q^f’aT 
qi^qfcl l'qsn#'^5lq%^q^'^^ 

qqTfqqi: fqq%®%q«^tqTq^R5^ » 

q qqrfqq^wq^^pT qrftFFimr^ 




Vo 




n^i'^cHtii^rq qffcq2T??qq[fTqTqt—fRqqTiirTqi q^i^qr- 

qrqqT'iRTT—qqiRrqm^ ^qq?i% i q^rtTF q^q ftrq?- 
g5n^=q^ 

‘Msfq ?T >T%fIFT 5T^cTT ^rq fq€i% l’ 

I ^rg^f^^fq 

‘STRf^fq f’ q=5|5l^^fq6ftq% I 

II (^o-qo ^A3/U^) 

^ 1 cT^ qTTiRTs^qjq^^rT^qq qjsqjqTq^qqfq^Tf^q ^qrfq 

'3 « 

f^fqcHfq, q|^ ^^IfqqT^ 

‘qTTqf?q q^ft: qT^I^qrqpfqTcqqqr^qr I 

fqgmTmfqqcqRIT: 5r>‘qK^q qq?qq: ll’ 
itq 1 «itqtqRf^Tl: qR<ii5T5^ sT^fq fq^fqqrfq q«TT- 
’■qTT^rqoiq, q^TSTqq^^q^qqqqi^fq SjfirqTq:, ^qf % 

‘^^?qTq^ar fq:^^ q %q q: l 
^ q fqqs^fqTT^c^q;^ ii' 

^ I ^fq-5Ti?rr q^iqrqTfqt^TqqiFqq^rqcqi^q q^q^q;’^ I 
qrqrarq^ ;jqf^ 

f^qr^qRt f^fq: | 

sq^fq^Tq; qf% fqqrq^qq;i: l' 

I qq T% qfmrqTqT% qmiq^ qqq^q^yrqrqqf^qfq:, ^qrrqt 

f^rqqsR^qrqrqfq qqt ^qqqvrrqTTf^qqfqq^qnjqrgqqTc^ 





“c1?T (^T-f^. 

aT3nJTTciT^T'iI^551^^rT^^' sift5#5TRt i 

^ CT5 ^'tf«T?[T q?q^?t5?nfe>TTq^iTfiTq> 

1% I 

‘fq^TTJT^q^gt ^ejZTRIT^T 5^^155 l’ 

5?nf^?TT, 

^rffprl^q jq: I 

iT?^aiTiT?T5ifrs^Hq^>€t: n’ (jtt. f^. ^R?) 

^c^rfe^T =q I m TT^mmr ^^rr^n^Tsfttrqmc^ 

fqqfiT^, 5qT?rT?TJT5y?rpj^qft^^Tci; qr^r* 

I q«iT 5TT?#<| 551 ^?^' ?% ^ 

tjtRi qTT^Tsq; I q«Tr qr ?|q 'q'tfqspiqirq fqqFqq;T^> q ijqqi 
fq^Fqq^ I srq fq?ri?iqTf'qqf5Tqr?q 1 fqomi^ ^ 

•q^qq I TjqT ^ ^HI <^^chd ^ OT 
q:^qTf^ =q i qq^tqrFr ^^f^q^r^rqTFq qFqjqi^qqr F^qqifq 
arqiR^rq sTTfq^qqqT i qq ?? fq=qiq^—qqqq: ^qq^q^q 
'3t’ qq, qqt qqTfq qrqq?^ 5Trq;qrqJ5( -^fq qitsq 

qfsq^TTf^qcqqqT^^qTqr q'^qi^ ^-q:, qqq q M^qifeqtfqsiqt- 
q^-fq 5 Tq^q-?q^s^qTfq^Rqq 9 ^% arq^f^q qifqqr- 

?>qt F^rqpqiqt q^qr^i F^iq^r qqj: 

‘3iT?iqrFTq5"T saiH qqqr q^qf^eq^ 1 
[TopJi'^l qqq^ eirrq qqiqq^^ (qr.fq* ^iH®) 

^qrFqqi, dtq q 5qfqqqTFqqiFqq^q|Tf^qTgqi^'q qiq;RiqtqT- 

qfqqqlFqqTq^ifq%5TTqiHqrqFa'^F?q^qTqfq 
q^Tqtqqr^s qifq?Tp^s5<jq5T: 1 
^iftfq^cqqT^Fq aqiqi^ciTFq II (qr.Fq. VI 






'TTT^%^ 


^^?TTF?fTr fq^fq^T I 5?T?fq ^ fi^ 

q?^rq>T'if i’ (’tt. f^. vi?^) 

q^Tq^r^|if^5PT5m^'iT, affq^rT arm^ ^rf^R- 

^r^q; ?cqTf?qi^'q ^rq'qtsT^T I M\JT?q‘^TVTfTr^^TFqqi^'T ^ 
‘^iT^qio^s^f 5qrH^r^%?T q^Tgerq i 
arq^iqi: HJTT^qrar aqiPe^qr ir (iTT.f%. 

q^qifejTT qiHqJT^ qiFq^qTfl^Q^gqi^, |q;T^ qFfiJT, ^"qiT^ 51T^- 
JT'J# =^ qfcT I ’^ftq^T>T|TF!:q515Zllfceifq^qq =g 

SJTTC^ =q 5 «T?l 5 1 

q-^r sqTf^^arTfm II’ \?Tr.r^. viqn) 

qF^ arfqqq' qFsBJTiqt^iq Fq^Fq^q i jq^Fq jng^T?r:p;T^^ta’- 
^^Tf^’sr^TF?iF^^|R^T?rFqqT^'q sr^q^rr 3i?qqT arq?;?!?^- 
sqFq qqJfq Fqqq^qqiq Fq^Fqqq, qq 5qF^5 ?iqrr^- 

?qqr ?Fq qF?:?^^—qF^ q|Tqqq ariqqFq?: ^qqjsqr^ft^ qq 
HqFqqi^q: ^qqqq: i q q qi^Fqq^Fqq - ^q p^^s^rq^flq- 

q^Fcq^q q:^q =q 3i?qqT 3Tfqqr Fq^cqqyqfifi q^T— 

qiF^rqrrqr: q^T^ra^q 3d?q 5qqFq^f%, tfqqRg ^tq q^^q, 
aftqq^ *T^cqT, qqr 5 qjT^qlFTq^T Fq^Fqqqqq'tqqq'Jf^siq, 
^Fq—qi^fqq;^^ F| arqqF^qq^qTq arqi^qTfqq^^Tq ^ 5ftaq- 
5rtqq;qrqiiT5qqtqTq arFqq^qqtqcq^rq ^qrq 1 q%q?qiFq q^qrsf- 
q#q, qFf q%qt qrq ar^q: qjFsrq—q^Jr^^=5^q:, qFq^ 
Ff q%q> ^qqFq=5®rqqjF?qq:, qqrqT^r^F^'qiF^qqFqTqqTfeqjq- 
FqFqqFqqq=50TFfqq^TFqq53!qq^:, ^fq %q—qf| q%^q 5#^q 

qqqf^qqqt fqj q^qi-q^T^r^q 1 qqi«rq’it qr ^q^iF^qq^TT^qi- 


ci?rq fq^cq^^ I ^ mqF:^^qqtq:, q?Fffqfe:—f^qfq 

fq^aiTTf ^=?qqTq =q qq I sifqqr^yr vrirq-- 

f^T q fqqRqqqtqfq^^ ? ?fq si^ q??i?^T'f^qtqq5qT- 
^qfqqT'?;'qTrqffi«^qTqT?q i qf^cqRq qqiq \ g;5'n1f>TTq- 

^'q^q ?%qq, ^qqfq^siq'lfll^'iftqqTTr^^q, ^fq^#q ar^q^T^I 
qq FqqT^orrqi qzfq^iiqqfq i q ?q^ qiqqqif^qiqq q,?q qtqi^: 
^^i^ag- ?qqq 3TFqjT5;r:p:: ^qr^^qTqqTTfqqTfr’a^Tgq^trq^Tfq- 
q5Tfqq5g;erqqqfqq^Tf5r^fqqofTqf^5ft^qq^i^qi’; qr ^qmszf- 
fqfq I qq qqqr fqq^qfqq qqq—?fq qqrqq q srftq: i qq 

a?q arqqjq ?:«ftqqi qjqq qf^ 5 ?;rq: i qqfqq-f%l%q q-q?qq: 
ql^jqrq qT^r^jq! q^iqi^^fq arg^^iqsq^Tf^qTqrqifq^^^^qTqf’q- 
HTTiqi qRqf5qt^^5riTTqqTqi<5qiFq srgq^tfiTqTq—ffq qyq: 
qi^tq qfqqqif^qqq:, qqifq fq^q^q: qf^%q^—qq qiq|q5 
f^iqqxq, qq: 'jfq^ q^tsq q^q ?fq, q?q qjf^qq q5q:— 

?fq qq:, arqjq qq qqq q^ qR^=qt fqFq^ q^Fffqrq^qqfq’^q 
?qTq?’q fqqsTq^q q^q qqq, qqif^—^qqq^i q^rq^T q^iqii- 
F^q:T qi^Jr’qft q^^qi q^T, qi qqrfqqq^qrqTf^rqfjiTqqrq^qTrq 
qqf?;qfq:—qq?q?qrfq sTTqqq^qtf^q^qrq i qqrff 

q q^iqq q^q?q q^qqq i' (qT. fq 6 \\ 6 ) 

^5q^q q^Tf^qT-qqiqq qrqifqq^Fqfqs ^qtqqsqR^qfqq, 
‘ 5 ^q qqqrqqq’ i (qr. fq. 

‘q^q qR^f^qq qfq.:qqi^^qq ?q^q’ (qi. fq. 

^fq qfTpsqTfqqtqqqicqq^’^i^qqqqjq i qqifq q?qqq>qf'J^- 
fqq>iqqqTqqTqfqqq>q^qq=^qqqT fq^fqqq, ??^qq q^qiqq— 






vv 

1%, cT|qf?: =q fpsir^: i ^l^cqt 

q^qp^qi^ q^f^^sriq ^TRT^^qJTfcTqjq’qtqc^^ 

1 qqt^ fsiiq?^ 

"arsTT^iTi^ 5n^T5rf^q? ^r^Tf^rq^q^r I 
tqTqJT<iim5Tqr ^ir q^q^cft q^r ii’ (%. ?. ^i?) 

ffcT \ 

qrq^TRqf^ ^ ^5: tRiRTt I q^ ^iqTf^rqsTTq^rq-Ttq 

aTqTf^rqF^q^rqcqiciTrq f%«iTwirq I irqts^qjnift: q^rfq^'jtqqqt: 
q^^qsrqrq^ q^qtft^i^Tqir^Tqfeqi^TF^qqfrq qn qfcfgr^: 1 
ffq 3iTqqf^i5 ^ \ qc^ q^qpcjqf^ q^mfq: 

>Tqq^—q?I VTlf^ ^ =q | qirFq F| fq^Tiqt 

qiqiqlsfq 3T^ mqqr f^qqifq q^r fqq^ffs^qqr, fqiirq^ ff 
??fqfq snTTqq^qsrm^r^qtsiqT^fq ^rqjiJrc^, cTqr=5^if^ 
.Fqq^q^—'3i5fqq;3(' ^fq, qqc^ ^TqT% fq^Rq^T srfqqiTar 
'Jqq qfqfqirqqq^lqq arqqTqqjq qTqiqifqqT^'nTqqiq I 3T^r 

qq I’q^Tq^qrqT q^rq^rPcq^r qiqr qqq qizR^fq 
srqTT^ I q 5 qq q^rq^raf^: srq^T %fq 1 srq qq qq f^q^q^ 
qfq arFqfi^ qVq|H^lqqTl:, qq q^fqqrqqFqqq?q5T'f,T5q>q— 
?Fq q q?q 5 q; 5 , q?qq|iqTfq^ g ¥<? ^q^q?:qr«fqfq 3 Tq?:q)qi!>- 
q^qTq?q 'sTfqq^g’ I ^qf^qifq’ ^fq qfqq, fqsnqiqj^iqt 5 
^qqjq^qrqqrfq ^^01 ‘ai^’ §fq qfqq 1 arq^t^rq '3»^- 
Fqc^q’ qq srqq^H, q5?q%qf«qiq ‘?qq|^’ ^cqqqgrTq, 
qrqrq^ q qfqfq^eqqrqrqT^q ^^T^ arf^q qqiFqq qq qi'q^q't 
fqqqf:, qqifq qg;q 5 zrq|r^^?:q qcqqTqrqTFqqq’q'TqT^qifq qqsqfe- 
F^qj^qrfq qr qsrmq^q fqq^f^q 'iq 3 T|q^', qtsql 

^rrqr, qsrFqqiq;, q^rc^ #q?^’ ffq fqq^f^qqqr 



qr^sFq =q ^JTTfq ^5qTfq?T^'t«^TfqnT’q?q?TT^qq^HTfTT^ 
3iFqq5?q?ifq^i^q?f: ^sTT mH^qq; i ^qr ^TTq^qtqi^q ^ ^?q?cT- 
^sqqqqqrfq i =q q^Tqr^qqq^— 
qqt t^cqFr trq ^^sfq ^J TfHirqm^ qifrq v^mqi- 

q qqisq qq fqq^q: i qq 5 qT.qfqfq mq: atq 
sqq^Rqqtsfq fqq^f: I ^q—?q ^qT^iqrfqq ^qr^r 
qqqi ar^qqqr crqr ^Tiqr ^qq?^, q ^ qfqfqFqq^^qifq %q^55 1 
qiq^.crqifq q'<^ 5 q^ qq^^riq fq^^ qiq^^ sr^^q^rq^qr qqr 
qqFq 1 qq q qrqrcqqj q^q^q ^qq: fq^si^ srqifq qqq qqq: 
q^q q qqqsr qqqrqfqFq Fqrqqt qq q^sqqiq 1 q^qqrqFqqJT- 
qRqqqqR^qqqq ^qqq^i^f qq^r^rqFq, q^q q Fqq^iFq arq^q- 
qqjqqc^Rc^sFq i qe^ qqr Fqq^fq qc^ ^iFqqiqlqTq^q^* 
qiT^^^^q^qqq^i^qqT^rcqrF^Fq qrq^ qq?( qqi^q^iq qqFq i 
qqr qq^ qq; qFq qg 1 ’ aTqFqq^ qi^rFqqt qi qq vri^qi^^ q Fqq^q; 
qc^ ^q^q q5^?:5qFqq[^'qr5fqjrq^rqqTqqqqTq; arqF^'qqFq^q^- 
^nq^iF^nqF'jqqT^qf.q^^ 3iFq5qsq^^?;qq^TqiqqqTF«rqrq?qq* 
q^q-^qTFqtqg^qf^qoTfcqqj qqiFqqq^^q'tqqqqrqiqqi^^qq^T- 
^liF^qiT^q I qqT^jqqT^i<t^'iiT^iT% q q fq^Fq^^ Fqq^q- 
qTq qr^q Fq^f^q ^Fq i qq^ q^qqr, qFqFgqqrq^rF^r^^qqqT 
qa^qi^, ^\ Fqqt^:|:^qiqqqT, qTq^qqiq<q 

q^cq^^—fFq q qq^ I qq; i:»qqq viqFq qq=5^ q, qfq 
qqqqt qqq^^r t7qqTqTqT qq^q't qqq FqqsqqiFq qq q?q^c^, ^ 
F^ q^qt qrq; qqr qrq^ ^qrcq^q Fq^qc^ qctqTcq^qqr?qq1qq;qT- 
^qtfqqqq^qfqq^q^qq-^iFqqrqRq^ qreqiq't Fqq^qqiqaj g;'if 
i^q, q^qfsFq qrq: q|q^qTq^gqTFq^q5qqfrg;qqTqTeRfqq^"* 





^ ?^^q?TPcrT^JT^5Tr|S- 

fS^f^^cT^Tf^^ITTr-^TT^tfTt ^T^riTT^ft f^JJ^ZTJTTflsr 

q^riF'T ^t 5<jf Wff^ I qr^q ?^^T5Tf?T5i^;!:^TrvT- 
qcTFr^S^T^fcI ^'T, ^=E?5Tr^>5ITr?cT?^T^ £fT ^j:, 

^rSJT5If5l^T 3T?j^JTT?T'7TT: I ^^-fjTrT-^R^^qrf^- 
^s^fq qr ar^oqTq^ql^ fTr^^fo^qr qfe^q^q 
3T^r«5dqiqqT3gqTqT qfcT ^fqqrqdrnmR^^ 

‘fqq^fqftFflTqTql ^ rqfqfsr^^ i’ (fq. ^to) 
^cqifq, 3T?q2ir VT[q5T: qi^ qqq^iqir^ SH^vq qfq qr ^nqqq^R 
l^qq; q^qj wq 3rqT?T%q^¥q^S5'iI?r>Tq^¥qt fq^q: | fqj^q^g q^- 
^qiq^qtr^qqq^Rfiq q;q ai^afqfq^F^^^q-: g;qff?Tqq^T^qq?q 
—5fq ?qqJrq ^riq-g ^rtq^^T: qr^^T’^TT: i q^rr^^fqjqiqf^w- 
fqT.%% 5 q^5fq|qq^^^^ q 5T?q^qqqq5[t^fq STfq^Sf'qT- 
rq^qg;rqfq^fq q^qtsq fqqJTdtiq fqqflg 5 iqq:, qisfq trq^q 
qfr^'iit ?faqTq:, qqrfq ff arFq^^qr qfq^i; iTfqfq =qq;qqiTit qq 
fqqqfq, qq?^ qsqr^ fqq^eqqfqq 3?r q'qqfqqjsqFrTq; 
^?Tqj=q?qqr q sTiqfq^rr^q, ffq fqiq?^q i q^qrfq ?^Tfq 
%qq^ qqr qfqq^^q^rq Fqqieqgfq ?qTq?5qeq:eqqTfq qqtfq- 
^q I 3Tq dTqc^ q fqqfq: | q^ qf^^of qqi VTq% q|q 
qqq^qi qifqq'^^q ^qqfq^q i q?:Tqrqc^ qqr fqqq- 
^qrfq ar^qi^rq^fi fqqqc^ q qfq q^fq^q qq^qTqqTqfqq^fqr: 
sqrfqqq l ^q^qqq^q q sr^qr: qr?:^qqq?;qc?qTq?5qq:^g[q^ST- 
^qqcjqtqs^q^qrqqiqqg-iqirqqq^qfq^^qTqfpqqqiqqqTqTqii- 
qjq^qrfrq^ifq^qTfqqjqqiqqfgqjT^qiqvqq^qf^'nTqT^qqJT^q^T^’ 



r-ri-^cT^irferT^f^^T ar^- 

?«?R tilTiqT; I 531 

mq?q q^q'JTcqrcj^ ^?iTi^if<q aiiF^t^c^ ^ifq aTTr^cqnToiTfq 
fqai^q^q'iqq^Rq fTqif^Tc^qiTfi?iqTfcif5q^^T^T5=cT^q^^q'?;i5^f?«?- 
^qqj^qq^^T^T-qq i ‘^qT^T?TTF¥iq^q5ROT€q5^qT5=qq: q^iq- 

?Ttiiqr ?qT^’ Fj^F^^qjTTqRTFq q;«ff%c^ q ar^qi^F^Fq 

g=5^fiTFq q^iF^cj, i qfcrFq^TT^wqq' a’^F^T^TRqq'q 

Fq5|.GiT FiTS'jrq^q^qTFfl^q— ?Fcr q Fq^g i q|q 
qqq qiqc^ ^tt i qdFsFq ^ qqq ^q^q^ir^e^q m^rtnq 
Fqq^qqjq =q q:p;T?[T-Fqri5T=qiicq>Rqrq:f;cq cTqTfqqq'?:FaTnTq- 
^Tq|q ?Fq qrqq, ar?^ ^q 5qrVf%:^qqq7 %qrc#q, 
q^ ar^tq tsq^jq^Fqjq^q ‘q^^TqrqqFq q^'q; qq^q^ i q^qr- 
qiFq q qr% qqfqqqrqqqcq’ 5TT?q^ Fq^Fqq^i; i qq =q 
«ft?q?q^i?q>q^5fr 

'f?55T^q qq^q?fqqT sqT'^rqFqg^ i 

c 

qqi F% q^qt^Rq ^qqqqrqqtcSFq^ II’ (?q. q^T. VU) 

?q?q fqqqqtq^qaq: I q?;^q qi^q q^qrq g;FqqfqFq Fqiqjqc^ i 
■q^'^t^q qqfq q^rnqci^Tq^ w fi^i^mi*^' 
qRJr5RqTq;=^qFqftF^qFqqFqtq5^qTqr qq q?=q ^Fq^q q qqFq 
qq; %q Fqqi qq^^q i qqi ^8ETcqq% f^^rqKqiqqrq^, q qqf^q 
q q'^iqtFq q'qf^l'q^qrqTFq qqjifq^q^q fqqr—?Fq qrq??q- 

I fqqy q^lFs^qqqfqiq; Ic^q 

qj^rq ^qiFq q-qi^qqr q^q^ i qi^^qFq ^ffsq^q^^qqT i%qr q^q^^ i 
^F^jqToqFq q^qrFqqisqqqT^q Fqqi q^q^? i qq^F^q =tqqiqiT- 
fqqq>rr?qqg;arq^qj 5 «q;T^qFqqT^qTFq q qqF=q l ^^^^a^fq'^cFq 










qTT^f^^r 


^ ^ ^rciTT^f|^^r5y^Tf^-TT^5ii^ 

^STia; I ^r^^STran^^qiiTT: ?T5Ft=^^T^'iTfsrr?F^ TTTJTmq^fzf 

f^^T ?ff ?^ra?5zf ^ ^qiV^^qrT^ sT^ff F^rf^T?rT^ci^^tf%^- 

^R^^^mEiTFq vr^^q?iT|f%cTTfffFg^fqFg[f;TF«f^^?^^^q F^l^fr 
I rsiitt^t ?^^?^qF^^'if5f?ir^TT^'fliqf F^?tt 

fq5F^^^ ?r—?F^ ?^F^Fc?t 5 i::¥ cTt^sbit: i ^^F^^Fq qr^Tf^^rq:? 
qjTFs^q F^^it w > sF^ ?qTiFq sr^^ iFct artq 

F% I qF?: 5 'iffTqfcJTf.’fl^^¥i|T^q^RRq^qq:raF^^qFq:- 

qlqiTiRq I R^ariR qTrqTiRirF^qJTF^^qq^R^cqiF^R^TRRift- 

:p;r^Eq^q^f^E^^^^TF^^Tq^t?T5RT^'q q^TR^iFq;q;TR|FR ^%- 
f%gqq qjqr Fr^t^i^ i ^iFqcq^Fq ^^5 =qq:RRFq q«TRq^i^ RT^^q 
%q^5rq5q:R^?RTq;?52^qiq«^qT rFr^r^t i ^rtF|—RF qciif% 
q;q^ ^Fq^cq^qq^^T^^—ic^iF? rF? r qq^iFsii^ qsR 

fiqq rr qqq eiiFqq—iFq fq> r qqr- 

t^q qr, 3T?q^?qq5T^‘tSRt, R qq ?T^^q:, aTspj^. 
qifeq^q qsqFqq ? FqrqTfs^^qcqiq—^Fq qf^ 

qFqqicRFq qqqFq’RRqqiFq^^ ^qTq?5qq5iq^=^Fqq^Tqrq- 
RTfqqqfFqqFa^qTrq^tq^^qq^RqqqgFq q^ir’R^s^qF^^q- 
^qqiqqiFqFq R^qR^ii;^ qqqF^q—?cq?RTFRqq?q5FqRTq^q 
^qiRf?Ig;t qrq qifsq^ Fqqqq^^o^q-^ ?qq^q q fqiffq 

Fq^cq^ I q^Riq F^qqrqFqqqqTqifq ^qq siRRiq ^RqrcRq)- 

Fq?:^^qTRiqqqrq^qiq?’qqT'<qfq:q5l^5cqTwqqiq^qiq qrqsrrq 
q^^FqFq qqqtFqqcqjq; qqffq^Fqcqiq FqFiq^T^qT^qj^qTf 
3rq?qi^®q5qq^5rrqF^q\ qTqqq^TqqjF^qqiq^q R^q^qqqFqg^, 
qrq^q=5STqiq^Fq^tq q^rqgqrFq^^q q 5 FqqqgRrFqq5%q— 




?rfT 1 H qcr 3T?:q^iT^qi ^TST^TSf:—^;§''TT?lTiqT 

qq?q^ C7%fi^^q?q =q ?T 32 tqJ'?:'iTT^ STqfqS^ I 

q?q^ qjc^qc^ 'q^q-frq^rrqTaJT's^vq ^qTg^T'nr^ qT^rralsi^r:’ 
ifq 1 qq; q>jc^q ^rl^q^fmqjqTq ?fq qrqsqq^qrsqq^q^qr, 
qqtq;^ 

‘qcqqif^Tqqq^rf qifqqT?! q i 

-qr^ ^ rcni^ilcMPii^^dHii’ (^. r^<i) 

I q^q-cft q qTTq^TqiTF^q^Tqqrqr ^qicq^rfq;- 

qqqq^qT, ^^ qcq'^;rq|TfTqT?q^q^rq qq^if^q—i 
qw ^q Fqr% qFqFqi'^ qqjqiq^qiq q^q^iq^fqyqFqq q 
qcqFqfqFfqqq=5JT^—q-qTqqqrqT?q i q^ qqpqqr qqi q 

O 

qiFq WT'=PT^ ?q ^gfq^qTqqFeq'qqiF^fqqq'qTq; qq^qiFq qlqrFq, 
q^q qFqFqFrqqq^sq^ i qw q^qqiqqqq qqFq, q g Fq^rr- 
^q^, nq ^ q5q?qtqqrqqTiqTlfqq^qfF?:qiqt q^^qrFqq^qj- 
q^ofqFqsqiFqqrqqTqqlFq^F^^^, sr^q^qqi^qq^qTfFqq- 
qRqifqq:TqqTFqq.TFqq’:m^V'i^"iqq^'qq qqnrqqFq ^Iq^r- 
qgiFTq5Tq5: gFqFq^qqqqc^ ^q^qT-qqr^qqF^s'^qiFqq^iq^i?- 
q-qqiqr^qq qqisqFq i qcqtqi^q q^rq^^q q^iq^qrq^Fq qqt^- 
q:^qg^qqT qqT^qiqt Fqq^iqr q qiqcqfqFq^^qqFq qrq- 
s^TFqq^qTqt Fqqq?q ciq'iqqiTq% i qc^ q^^fFqFq ^rFqjqrq q^q 
qw^RqFq ^Fqqtqxq, qg q^rq?q q^sFq;qrq^(, iFq 
q^jFq qTTqtqt F?qFq: \ vrqq^^q^|Rq>?g ?Tqi3'flsq?q?qq-q 
i^q q Fqqqfq^ srr^FqqFq—fq^qTFq^q^Tti^TqTq; ?Fq 

q|^: I q^TcqFq q^TH^ q'^iq^q^q^qR^q qfqiFq, q^rq^i^ 
qiiFq ^T?q^Tq>¥qq'?:qTq ?Fq i qq ar^q i q-^Tq^Tqt g ^q?q 

V 







1 ?iT ^ q^n'^TiT^nTqt 

^TT^T^rfiTT qrqcfq1t-g5qqf?'q^q'^i^gTr?:q;irqrqg^rq5if^fq'fqifq 
^RqfcT ^'^%qTqTq\qr*qlciq5Tfq-eTF^q7JTTsfq^Tq^'j 
fqqqt^q ^Tqrfq ^qsr% i 35''^qrqTqr^^^5Tr^fq’FqqifT?q^Tq- 
—WfrT ^Tcqq;^, rT^; qfq-qt '^Tq'-T^,’ ^^qTfq^fl^T^qT^^qT 
q fqifqfg^s^ I cT^ifq qTg^iqqiqrc^ qq qq i 

^ ?qtJ?rT?qqfaqcqqxqqt^jqyc^ ^q^'q^^qH* 

q<3fl^qqTq'jqx^ q'q-q^^qg^q^T ^ft^qr^r^f^:— 

1 ^ qqq I qgc^^ 

‘3T?qqT qpqqr f^^Fci:’ ?f^, ^gfq 


fq^qqjuf fqq^yr^ | 

aTqiFqg^q^qr^qqiq^qr^Tqiq^rjqfqq;;:^ 'qy^^^qt 

q|TR I :q 

^q|q?«-qqtqFT q^iqqiq^ f^qfiT- 

^T^^qiFqqir^q^ rqvqi^TqcqRqFr 
^5=%^R^3Tgqi%qq^qX qj^ q,^qq«T?q^ I 

f^^jTcTTfq ^T^fqxrrfq ^ cT^ 

^ ^T^Tcq! fqqgq af^iqrq:, q cq?qqT I 
^^^THTqsfq qs: ^ :q 

, qoqxfq^qqi- ^^rxc^qi ^q-^T’^Tt qtrJT' 

^qiqr ^ .q^qxqr 


?rq I qqr 


?;jqx q^f^. . . 


^^\: I 

■.II’ (m.r^. 


0-? ? / 






# (icr f| qqy^^iT^lI^Tqi^ ^I^’ 

^ ^ -^Tf^ ^fTSqr I -^sfiT % ^n^: 

afciqRqitviq^qgqj^^^qTf^f^g;;^ qq qsj^ | f^T^Tcrt^^^* 
^tsi^qT qt^: ae^'JIT^. 

^c^rq^^qR^^Sf^rqt ^FT fqq>q:— 

^Wci: 1 ^qrqnifsfq ?qTcRf^ nY^q'flsfq 
—ifFT qj^qirpf FTl?qT5TT|^^f^, ^ 

FTi ^rf^^TFcRq;! Ftt Hfn?.TR| i rt^^sFr 

q^iRTIR^T^R^lt^ 

R^M^qf qjqj^ | 3 ^;^^ qcIcRRcRRlF?^^ I tTFiTq|q^^ 

^^RHrq<igq^fFTcqfq RT^IR'^^^Ft "R 

few I ■Q;^ "RT^^ 

3(^ q^Tfi 

R^SRi^dfR^lf RfRa^RT5^^^^I’5 • 
'R^=53lR;5l\t^T«T fe^R^Fr 5 RlfeR^J^ II (RT. f^' 

I FvT?TinfR^ ^ ffRfR’5, 3 T'R^iFt 

^F^i r q^ ar^ i 

'5T5cqiF?fF5aiR5R1f R ^ vitRiqRRRT: li 
?Fa 1 qq xf sqaaR^cRR^RT^ ‘R Ri ^ ^ ^ 

^ 35 R RJ R’ ^qFvTFfa<5 i|cRq^aFR?R^^ 

(3T) 

RKlrMcb'RN'lfe 

3?lj(;iq:q(qe{;]-f)[.^5TR5«?TCRTR^R*t rFr^ ^iFacaRRI*^^ 











'T^T^r^T^T 


(^) firsFcr HFciqg- 

C\ 

{\) f^^qi 

C^) 5T[vf; q-^^f qrq t^rrqqttq qf^siq 

{^) qTqTrqfq q>7:<iT5r^t qfrrqjfeFT^^ 

(<i) qqTsfq 3?^q-5^?sq?s5Tqq-^"Tq^qqqT qfe^qr ^TT^R- 

qiFqq qFqqjq 

(^) qFqqT-qq-^qTq'iFqfiqiNc^ ( Fqqqrq^^ ar^Tfi qqFq ) i 


(STF) 


q^q-qT^qT^^cqf 5 — 

(?) ( ^'iq ) q^qRq^J-qyTT-^cf 

(^) ^fq; 

(^) q^qRl^qr q^fqgrjqi^ijfj 

(x) qcqq??^q;^q 5T[q ^ Ff^c^r, 
N t^TqqTqqiqjRT, 

(^) ^tqqFqjq; srq-^psq 


(^) ^^^q-^eqqiqjTtitq 


qq't^* qqFq 1 



(?) 

^-qqqcqr q5q;cqTcqq^e^T3^qT q 


f^iirfhar ‘^:\ siftfci; ‘>7:’, 7:m: f^Tiifa^ 'm’, rt?: f^^iT 

^ ‘ 5 ’:, qrf^: ‘S^Tt;:’ 5171 ^ ‘s':, 5 if:F^;^ 

'§t:', 5I£^aBr ‘3 t:’ ‘^'■\ 

3THf^ffSJT‘s:’^‘q:’, ^?t: ‘S:', '^:’ 

q5^T q:€?TT ‘ 377 ’ 571'jt =^, ^ ’?r:’, 

‘3t:’ qi^sj ‘|:’, ^^fqqir qi^^^q 

‘q’:, 5Tr^-qf«I^ :3q?q5q '^T:', 515^5=^ ‘Ji:’, '5 t:’ 

?q5T5q, ‘ 37 ’ ^q =q, ^if^iq^T 7:?i5=q ‘^:’, t^iq^F^.: 

qifrq^ ‘q’ Tpqqq, tq Cm? '^’ '3Tt, 

3TT, =q^T 31iqar ‘q:’, 37^f:r^ qfq^I =q I 

37^^ =^ qq'txR gq^iqfcqq^cq fqsqs 77 %^ 1 

q^R^Tfc^q % q^q^^qt ^qq-qqqqi'qT qc^q- 

q^T^qq ^qTcqqTqRFq°qqFE«7qq?:qqiqir^q f77?iq7fqqTq55qTqr 
fT^qfiFq^3iq^5cq^^7:^^tFq’q^q B7R?^qT?q’E^^^ qq^i^'q 
5^qTrqqf7:q'q7T^%q ■^q-’qrfqqt qif^fqq i q^rtqi^ 

‘37qf^: =q 1 

q7f^ql 5 q^l^lf qRqiF^qfqq^iT^ H’ ^Fq 1 

37q%q =E7 qj^T'iT ^F|^q^q gr^q ^TTi^q q 37'7:qrqq^t 
g^FwF^TiT^ gqqq am =q ^qFg 1 qqr q;iF^^qFq«q: gq^^jq 

fqiFq^q spTq Fqqq% gqi qsiFq^q qrqqi q-q-qm- 

^qTfq^qi q^tfq^q Fqfe Fqg^c^, 37qTFq qrqF^qFgsqiqTTTqFg- 
^qic^ 1 gqiF^ aFg^Ti^qfqqr qi^qqf ^ q^Fq^^57::gti^- 
fq57Fq5TTqqqFqgg^s’if'qsT7:5BqiqT-^q g'gg'q^^qRTqrgFqqgqfT:- 

NO C> 

qrstfqF'j^gq'nqijg’^q: q^giTt Fq^Fqg: 1 gg t^q ^ q?q\5Tft 
b^Fg^fqg:, gr^tq qTgq>T^qT gqTFqq^qqTqtqqF^gq?q^^7:=^T- 


^v 




I 3T5f 

5rT^J=fr ^ crq- |%%^sf5TSTTZT;, ?{ 95^, 

^«TT i^t^5r?r%€rcr?w ^r^ftf^rf 

f^oJj j%ctTfq^]’^qqq | 

?rr^ q?r>; qraTfvrfr^erfw ii’ 

?% I cT«TT 


3TTq?TRt ^ ^^JTT’Rpq'fZfTr'T ^ II 

Ift ^q??rf ?T^zf cl^ I 

^R^T ^ qqr: ^qr ^qff^ #;^^r: || 


^rr^T^^^^if^fq-RTTt^Trfzr^Trc^i^ i ^jq-j-^^^q. 5jaiq-?:zr 
>jas^5nF,^ ^ 

I 3r^ W s^jwfa- 


'sjf ^, 

^ '""a^" ''f?^m f^Ma: II 




rT 3 f r ^ sjrq-ff | 


^wit ^ I ^ 5 H?^:, ^<^1 

??^qR?T^S^mqq?qq?^clT»II^: 1 

5imqT# 5rqcq55i5 ii 

q^sqf?5r?q: f^i^fq^tfiiaT: i 

3THT^ioT?Tsnrf m^v. q^q^iiqq?^ ii (qr. fq. ?ivo v?) 

if^ I qqqqt q^I^lfTf^^T q?^?5ITfeqt qfqqqr q^T 
q^i qqq?qifeqt^qq BT^fqr qf^q'qqq^feqt^^'^^q^qFiT, 

a 

qqrfq ^ qqq sFqicqfq qq??qq^c^qt5Tqq1tq;Tc^ q'jf-q?-qfqTcq- 
qjcqirfs I 5itqqq5'^'qqi%q ?fq q^^qoq’i^ i qw^^'teq^q't 
qi^T: ^^qr 5 tV^t qqffq—ar^^cf^Tq^q c’q qw^qi^ i 
^r^qtfqqfq^fvriqq^iiqiqqt 5 q^rqiq^ ^'^qq^^'q^q 3?5=q^q- 
'TSq^rqq'^'q qin^^^q^^^q ' q^Tq|TF^?iqfq??qqq 5 

q*qftq? fqiT^q^ 1 q qq q’^q'f arqqq: I qqif^—qT?5T 
Fgt#': qgfq ^^^^q^qiqqiqqT qqf^q, qqrfq c^qr qistiqra- 
f^qi^fqq^q qr c^cqf^^fqq^iFqaF^qqi^fq—qiq^ 
F^qq^ I qq qf? qeqqiq^ qqiFqqq’qdqq^^jstqfq^qc^qiq- 
^TqFqqTqq'n!5i=F5^'q q qqi^r^q^q qi^^q^^q qiqqiq^q 
qi 55?q^'t q fq^q: 

FqF^i^q^ ? ^Fq % qqfqfq qTq^-’*J'’q^q m 
q-HT^ ’qqqmi^q ^ 

qqi:, =q 3 Tq\ ^q iq ^rT^qfqq^ I 3T?qq5;qqTrqFqg- 

^qiqqiwfqqqt ar^c^q q<q^"t 1 q^sFq i^q^q 1 qq^wq^q q 
^Fq?t qqq^qr qq l^qTtqqqq qsqqTqrq55®q- 

q^^q^Fq^qqqi^qfq ? 5 EqT-qq(qq^qTqtgT^ q^q- 
'JlBqfqtf^q qiqqr?^ qiqqq^iqflF^qiT 1 qq^qqfqH^qqTqql^^ 





q'?:Tq7T, ^ \ ^ \ ^'terf.^ri^q 

f^^iffT: tei^rqTqf^B^ I ^"mq-rt ff Fq^gRirr f^a^qt, Iac4 =lqfrq 
I qf^ 5 q5^># 

5TT^q%qfq5£n?c??JT i 5 ?fq^ttq;^q^q qafq^TTfq- 

qiT?qf^^qiq’q'qq;qqff^.q>TiqfqqqRq^iq|Tf^q;T^?qq;5:qqq;Tqqi?q^T- 
^qicqq-q^rf^q^TTq^rqifqfqnf^q’q^^Trqi^qq^qf^TqiqqqqT - 

Jjf^ci^Rqqt q^Rqq: qT^I^l^^q, fRl Fi^q: | q^tTfl >q\qiqr- 
qfqqil: fiqqqgt 

‘ 3 T^q|qqqTfqg: ^qRqqRqfqqT^'ii 1 

feq: q^fl^ q^qi ^^: qrw.qr q^TRq^ 11’ (%. ?. ?l?) 

qqfeqtqf^Tq c^q^qciT^'qq^: f^iqqg^ 1 aqifq =q 
^ft^^q^ftqqqqiqfq fqq!??qq 

‘^51 qqq?Tq =q R5r 1 

qRR% cqqRT q^q^r ll’(q.'qT. ?Rl^?^ilVo) 

I qfqq^qjq^ qi^T q'^Stqqiqfq ^ciqqfq ^ftfq^q— 

^q^cq;q: I FqqqiqFq ^Tei 5qqc^ F^qf^qq^aq I 
fqqj^qq^ STrq^^ qi^qRFqq^^q^q SjFqcqqqfa 1 3^q ^ 
qir^nf CJq qjqFq qqqi^ q^q qq—IcqMgqqqqqTq'tq^^qk- 
3^5y^^_3i^Tq?q ^qqfqRq^qiqqp.iqqlq^qiq I q gqqc^, 
3TFq 5 ‘qqT-qls^fqiq^^qg’ ?Fq qtqq^f^^fT;^: 

^Tqsqfqt? ?q-5qqc^ ?fq, qqiqqjRl^-^Fq | 
qm 1 3T?qg^ qfqqiRFq qtqjqdq q;T^: | ^q^qqyq. 
qqiqqTFqqqrqTqqqqTqam^qi^ 5 Iiqqq?q^.^ 

?r:, ?fq =^r^—^q?q ^qRqpq qiqTqqSRqr qT qrts^q fq^qF 
^rq^tq>q> f^^q^pqqq^q: \ qqq^qqyq ffrq- 



I ?r«iT ^ ?r 5ifq^5Tri5ii%^^sfq 

^T%q? —q^m'J^cTT^q^ifiinc^ Rif?cT q>if—i 

?T ^ 5rTfTpqT%5T ?qrcT—arp’^^im: cf^TW 

3^^M'111pel5'3'q^^qT^ 1 f^dc^ ■f^^UftcT H^dcI^'q^^J- 
alsir^ofqstqJTirTi^,—?% sTi;^q%5rf%^- 

qq’^^iTfqjiT I q^T 5fmqi^T%?i f?«TcTT I q^iTq^ifq ^ 

f^5TPTiqj55* 

fjr^iqiqtrqJTt nT^nl^TTf^^T: ^rq^iT: i 
^Ttr^T’nsrt ?irq?fT: I q^^’jj^'t 

?rira5rF^5^qr^^'irPT'q^^5f^'5r5rr^f^!%5TJiiir ^^ 5=^55 

qittFcT fqiqfzrq I ^ft^iq.^qTfq ^ft^^^TcqrJTciTfir Beq?*?: 

..r 

JTqqrfir 1 

.. T(^ f^qrT'HT ?TTlf??T 1 ' 

5f5T I ^ =|[qrrq^?*qT—^q’qcqT^ffq^q>q*T^^ 

.rJTsrr^ arq^f 1 ’ 

qrr\ori^ 1 STfrT^: ^fTyEptsFa qi ^r?T5ft=5SW^TqT qT^TTcJT- 
Ep^qjc^ 5fiHi{ {T^ 1 “q 

'IT^ qt cTr^q’ { 'T- ) 

5cqife I dc^ qT^fqlq^qqq^Tq'^TFq^^dTqt ?iqfcqq^cqT?^ 
'q^Tq^T^^f^fTT q^fq^qtsst • 

qaqsq^qcqif’c fefqq'qt- 5) 

^qi. ?r'^^q>Tq^T*nf crqiTqf®TSqTf^q'^Tt 1 (q[T.f^« 





'TTT^'tf^T 


3TJT ?f[sw't«?^'>Tr^: I 

^ =^m?«TT ?ITfeSRT^^ 
lt% I IT^ 

^'Rg;qf ift fT??fi: a^t%aTf^% I fi=5^5??r 

^7^1 R q^r^iT^ I ^?rrf «^r^T?ci5ffRqT?5friqT—f 
^^^TTfR^r F| 1 

qm q fqifqc!;—etq'^q^TfqsRTq, srfq eqRcqr^ i 

rqq^^fTf.^ q^T q^^T’aft ^7:q>T^Tqq^^q fq^fcf^q^qr^mfcqqji 
^iff^TclIviqrcqcTl^iqqf^ric^qTqfflg^ 1 cfq ?T qif^q qvqqlqq?fr- 
ql^tqt^q^q cr^jq^r: q^RIlfTq-RfqqtsqFcTiqTfq- 
q^qlqqTRq^^q^q^Tiqfqq^qiqqcqTrqrq i 

'^qqR: qf^^qtsq fq^]: I 

q^TTf^q q^ fqq# qjqqcfqiRqq'q ii' 
ifq qtRT q>qq1^qquiqr|Ci:rj?^l^q;^qqKJI qjqiqjqiq- 

qiq:, qrqq; qq5qT^qTq ^q> fqqRqlq;, arqiq^q g qc^q^'a 

qfqgq 'qjqTc^ I q^q^qiqqiq 3T^g qjrr: I ^5qT 

qrqq: q^rq^f; qjfqq? qq aTJ'qiqfq^qq^cqssq ciq—^fg- ql%q- 
^qfqqq fqfqqr qi^^fi qTRirftqiT i qq^qcqjqrgei^q- srq; 
?cqifqoqq%§T: q-rq;; qq ^^^if^qqiT ^qrqf^q- 

^%T5»-qtfeqqiqrqi sT^qqqqfqc^qqTqfqq^Tqiq;! '3 t' 
5r5'°q^ I qy qyq^^qy^q ^'s^fq oqq^^qi i qq 

'^qrgq^qqiq^R^iffR^q qqt i qq^r’a^: qqq ^q^q^qrq^fqjts- 

^w^fqjqqrcqqiqfq ^qrfjq^f^ qpgfq qqyfq ^?y- 

q^yq^qlsR ^qylq fqqrq:—^fq •q^qqrf^qfgq^q^qqq I qi|qqq 

|q. q^f^’-q't STyqr^iiifqj: ‘3TT' ?fq qqqy | qt\^<jf=50r '^’ ^fq | 



'Hircl:HHVI-4r^-^lrHch^lc1"->M'J| |' ‘^fcTI 

q;T’ii^^^5ft?TT^5£qrq^^t^>iT^TiTH^RTTf5[f¥r: ^q?t=^^5r?T a^^ft- 
«5Tr5fi^?ff^^^'v[Rq^q:T^'JT 3T?T^t.q^'t^qqT^^^mr s^ql^qi 
3;S?rq5?5>TRTlf5T: q5q?TT ^TH^lfTp: %’ 5FcT I 

t \ sT«TiqT ^^^qqfT^^'iTr^q^c^ 5'qf 
=qpsTTHl ^rqeqsqf^^qirw ^cfrT ^fcr ??>JT^qT 

fq«ITFR^RT W.^^J q^’^fgsqq^^qr I 27SS^^ ‘^ct: ^fg 

(q. R^) I fsqtqr g ^c^q^qqiq^Tf^T^^qrga^^fl- 

fsqiT ^t^qqi^q f;?rr ^Tqq'Ji^qq^T^rqqqr^'qsqTqnT gq^qr 
R^q’^qr f«?ffqc?Tf5T|tq?fcqq.T q^R^T'^5iFqj^?qi^ I crqrfq 
q aH'^xqTqjq’^qqqf^'iqqTq^Ti^ ^qicqfq qqi^q ^'tqg;q^qcTr- 
^q^^qpqiqq ^qqfqqRqq^ ^RRq q ^qq^5T^ 1 fqqq^sfq ?Ttq- 
g;q?cqqqTrgq^rqq:?5qq'\: ^qq^ei^ I q q siqrqq^^qT, ^i%^sqi^fq 
qq^iqqqT-q'^CTfq^qR, qqt^fq qqq:Tqq‘^q'tr^='SMTqq?RTq?r- 
■^pqTTfqqf^sp^qqiqq^Tq; ^fq qi^^qg, qqf’^^q qi^rFq’^q^qq 
qiqf^ I g^^qt fqq5Tqq^^( I qiqfs qsiqiqfq fqqiq 

qTq% qq^q ;qqqHT?rqq^q<tf:q?qqqq qrq qqq f^q i q^Tfq 
q q?qq^^qTqqqTrqqqqg;^'qtsr?fisrq q%?i:—f<q5>qq't^qq^^, 
3T?qq: f qrsrqqiq?q qqqrqRTq; i qfqq: ^^qrq?^^ t^q ^iq^fer- 
qfqqi^qiqt^rq rqqfqrqqm^sq^q i q:pjqT5qqq¥qT ^ffqsqr 
qfi^'ii? ?qTq5=^qqrFq 5=qTcq«=qTq?qqqT qq-q'l ?qq?qT ^^qiq— 
5cqrq-^sfq qiq'^qqtq: i 3T5^?:ar ^rfqqTqsqq^^qq^qq^TT:- 
qT^> qcqqgr^q;: qqq qqc%q qrqq qq i qqifq 
5^q>qqqtqqTqT ?q^q^q^, ’^qTqrq^sdqfqqT^qq fqq^q- 





'TTT^r^T^T 


t7^ VT^rWc^l: ?Tq[qcT-clfT?iir 

qf^^'ifc^^T’q^Tr^ I ?f%?rTqi^sr 

I 3T^ «flc[?^gR TflSTf^RT^^gRT- 

‘f^q^r JT?e?5Ff 1 

qiqt^^ f^in ?r ^qra^ir tf^^r ii 

1 fi^^ qs?F 1 q^r^^cfT 

—?^^T5TT% qT?q^?^q^q?Ttf.iftf%^q^qc?Rqq5qf- 
qfr^5?q¥qqf<»j^ ^'^^■h^irt fi^ mi^fqoq-rFrir'qri^rrqiif- 

^^F^—gqnFqq ^f-i^; i g^T^'^qRf^Rrisr: q?iq:F^, araiiq- 

l eq^qrq^F^^qq qqq?qF^, qq^cTfuF^- 

^qc^Tc^ i Fspf^ qiq?iF^GqcqTtj; ^^ic^Fq arg^^r- 

q?5q^ q qqT’JT'irqT I fT^: 

¥q ^sitqqFqq ?F^ i srq f| ‘^-f’ 

^Rqq^q-^qj^cqfqqsr qjqqqffqrriJj, qqi^ 

‘■?:«rFq^?mTfqTST F?t 5 ^’ 

?F^ 15TF^ F^ Fqar^ sTg^F^Fq^mi ^Rq^^q^fFqF^qtqr- 
qTsRq'if F?qciqq, qrfr Fq^c^^qi^q^^rTc^ qif^q^q^i^TqF'^.ar^s- 
mcqq:-j=5qiR-’q?q5qq ‘^-^’ ?Fq i ^qr q qq?^ ^5iq^q^q 
^Tqq^Tqicq?:a¥q'1?55^^q c^c^T Fqar?5t JiT?qi ?TriTqfq 

'^fi^q^rr I ^q? q ^iFf^’ §% srqirf^^qr 5 

^qq^qi c^5cRq^5 I qi3;?ncqT ^^qqq 'jqqqqqqtqT(| 
5cqr^qi i qq^^'sqf ^ifq^qqTiq^^rr^ q^q^^rF^q qog^q 

I q g qqqr q"tq^q?qTqTqT^5., ^qqt?qRqq;%q^qc5- 

^qTFq^FqJir: qJ^qFqqcqqtqif^. ^qt^afFq^TRq^ q^Fq^HT^^ I 



=I^F^0^ f^^rTf^^TT^T^^'raf^ I cTt^IJTrT^'-rl^gsqi. 
r<Tc5^J5 1 =^r?T-5[^5Fq- ar^^Tq^^rnTf^r ^ anviTfqfjT 

f^^'TT^ST'lTTr^ffT ar^JlF^^ ‘3T 3TT ? t’ ^ I ‘3T^af 

5^ q’ ?F?[ I f^qq^ ^qi^fq qjfals^q: i 

aiR^q^r^qitJq ff 5 

erqTff ^qqrq 

‘tj^^qrqt ?TTciTiTFqTT«TPT^ftqr 

o 

si^jJrqTRq^fqlqTR 1 ' {^. >TiKq \. ?. vva) 

^FfT I ^'t^sfq qrfi^^5r>TrqT?V qq qq 1 qr^fT’a^^Fq 

q^TTtqiRqttqjTTtqjT^i^^^qi ^fqcqq^qqqiF^FqFqqlit ?5q^, 
ciqq^tq q^^sqi^—arq- qq;R, arq artqjf'^rFviqrq'q 1 qqq—'q aft’ 
5 Fq qt^f I q^?Fq riqT5iq?5t^^ ?iiTqsq; q q^q 

^qqqq?!q ‘ar, 3 ?t, q, '^’ wFq 1 qqq^it^sFq ^]^^^—‘s^, 3tt, 

‘ 3it’ I ‘ 3T, 37T, 3Tt, ’ ‘ 3fr’ I ^TPRjqRn^ 

q??^qq?iFq q^rqqi^q ^q?^, qqiFq 3Tf^5rq=5gicq^F^q^q9%^ 
qq ^qqr 1 ?= 5 # 5 ]qqt?g ^qqF^^F^^q qrFfq—fcq^q^^ 
F?qFq: 1 qqFq^^srr^ arg^T^q^qi^q^jqq qiHtqqq q^rrcj; 
qF^qqq qqTFqqtqiFqqF^^q^q^T^iq^q^T^r^'tf'qFq-qqj^qq^q^T- 
qrq^qqi^qFq^iqrqFq^tq q^r ^qr5^^qq?5tq 'arF^Fq' 1 
qqjF^ aftqii^ qq Fqjqi!iiFq.qFq;?q?q: qF^^iqi'^qq ^Fq—5^r- 
qfqqt^tqr^qnfqr^^ 1 Fq5T^«?qcqq?q qqq^ri^# Fq^qq^ 

‘qi'ffqTosqq sqTH Fq^J^q =q5sfq^^^ 1’ 

qqt^q Fqqq'q q^rqr sqiFcqF^^^ 11 (qr. fq- viqq) 

I Fqf|; jqqqqiqiq^q^q 1 qq^q q^qiqrqrfqsqqqfq 
Fq’*! qqr ^qicq-qqjqqqrq f^qFq ^qi^qq^q qq^r^Tc^ qfeqf'qq 









^ ST2T4 W?r?Tf 5 5TT^- 

f^e^TRen^i^iir 'ar:’ ?fcT 1 3f\^TTqJT?% ffi-JT^vr^ fem^rf^sw^ 

q?TRf^ ST^Stf^gT^^^q^^JT vr|TTq:?ir %^J- 

^r?T-fq5qTctTq^5if^qf<^q-?if?q=qT-a'qTqT 
g?5%^cn?^^TqT: ^^H^iT^^^qT^qfi^cTTq^^firq^Tf^T^siTlfqaT^- 
^'i?q=5^??irqqfqvqraT?^1 qq^q^r^'qTqT'qrf?- 
^q^l'TtqJT: I srq IT^ ecfrqif^^ 

‘5MTq^i^f?qf?;mq^T^^Fqr'q i 

q^RR^gvrjqq^ ii’ 

‘^^qrfq ^rfqqff^q'Jsq'sqri’g^i q^T i' (%. ?. ^,R6) 
Fq^*^ 

‘nqrJrq F^ q^xq q q^rqtsf^F^^qjqi i’ 

?fq qfsisqqrq^rq 3Tq?cTFqfqq^qTqf5q?cRR^:^^q5TFqiqRcqiTT- 
qF^qqtqi^q^qqiq fqqfq?^ i qqiq^rqtqjqjq: i ^fqqTqqqqiF^- 
^sfq 

‘q qqT?% Fqqi^TqqTqi^qqqsq: i 
q^=50T qiqqi qiqqqTq qi^Fx^qi F| qr ii 
gg;8fqqFq:Fqqqqiq^?^q qq^ i 
Fqgqi-^rqq7:qt Fqfqqrq: q^^qgr ii (F^i. f. ?i^v) 
ifq I qqr qqqrqqf^ 

‘qjiFqq^qji^sFq qq qiqrFq qi Fq^qr i 

qrqiFq qrqqqq FqF^^s^tqqq^Fq; II 

aft-q^qiqiqq^q^q Fq^Fqfqqfq Fqqr i 
^q q q %Fq Fqqi fqfqi^ ii’ 

(^. ^Rv-^K', 







I ^«TI 

?= 5 sr^ ^5 ^i fe^iT I 

^^qj: ■jqtq^'t q^cqfftq't 5^1 f| m 11 (f^. 

^fs^ifecir i 

^ f^R: ^sT^cqAI^i ll' (%.?. IW'a) 

??qrr? qcT^rqriewaM^^^ 5 r^ 5 ^^?TT I ^r 

q^^Rqft fq^qsrF^ fq’^q^a; 1 cTi ^??:Tr?5rqc^T?^ qiTfq-w^=^^q^^— 
?% fq-??qqTr^: qj^T’ ?% 

‘5^^ cTtS^qi^ I’ 

?rq I ff q qrfq tqTn=q^ 3?fq 5 #5^q, fq^nf- 

=q qT'?:^5qft q^qiq^q^frr^sij^ 1 qq f| srqjr^ilq^q 
qqqiqrqr qtFq^qqt q^c^T ?q¥qrq= 5 ^q ?5 I fq^q^q 
qtfq^^ ?fq 5 mrg;^TifqqFi 7 ^ 5 = 5 q^, 

‘!q fq^iff q^T^fq qq rq*qrr-qq= 50 rq 1 
q^qqq q^q't^ ^rfqiq^ qq^q^ 11’ 

vi> O 

^cqifq I qqjR^qq qqqr ‘qjqq:’—?^R?q '=qqq:’— 
qi^ssqcqicj, 'qqq;'—qt^q^Tci;, q^q^i^^q ‘zqqf’— 

ijqfqcqTq[, '^q^T^^q qqqF—q-cqcqiq;, ‘q^ft' qqqfqi-q:, ‘^qT’’ 
sqq^q, '^qF qqq?q, qqJT^tsfq ‘qqqqqt:’ qqqr I ai^q^qr- 
^qqrffq FqpqTq^^qTfq rqjqrafqj^q^q 1 qr qtq^qF^T ^ifq^qsq^- 
qj^oT^qqT?^—^q q^ qq^T: q^qforqr: fqqc^ 1 q^fq: q^ 
qsfqqe^ qq?q>rq 1 q^q f^rqqtq^rq qql^qqqr 

qqfqsjFq fFqsc^ qtfqf^cqfqqtq^ 1 q^ 

jcct ^qf^sq^q qTiiqf'qqTfqjqit'qqqqq q?g,q: q^^fqqq ^q- 
qfqsqqqq qqfq, qfq 5^q^q^qT^3^ 1 sr^qqr 5 q't^qqqq qqr^q- 






q^5T:, ^35=^ inffT^q 

?iT^Tfe^<TetJTg;ii? fT^T - ^rsf^^T Rr^fa - f ^Trq^55ra'|^iTT-- 
5T^^Tr?^‘\'^r^ciqT qR^fT gSf fl|qiI>ZTT^T^^qT 

^fqf^fcT f^f^sr I cT5qT ^ fsiiqjTq^ sr^fr^i^f 

srm?T^mfq|frqTf?8q 

‘mJTtqf^ iTgmrzTT f^^iorrq-^^fq’in' i' 
l ST-T qq qmfqqqiSTf^q^’qq^iqf^q^rq^^rqg; ?qtf 
?^Tcq%q ^c^qfqa ^Ftfqqjq^qqi^ 

fsrq^rr^qqTqrqr %q5Tr^qqi^^: i 
f^Tq^frfiqqFqrrrfq^ n’ 

I qq =q qqrqiqtsfq t(qfi^4 q^ifq qqjfq 

q^iqFq5rq q^qqqiqfqgq i qq qt q.« 5 t 8 ^qRq 5 ^<iiT- 
?qfq g[qqqf^qqiT?^q fq^q; i qqTf|—3F?q^fq ?T5ic^ q?^- 
fqfq qqrg^q: i ^■^ar ^qnrfq^q qq—^r^qjqf^Rqiq 
q’q^qiq l h qfqr qt^'isfq ejcqi^rqiqts^q: qqi^qqqr Fqq^rfq 
^iqqiqq i Fqqq^ir ^r^iqqiFq qr qrqq Fqq^iFq qrawlqqq qq i 
^ q q[FTqq5If:q qq I 3{q qq ?fqTKFqqT^RqqT'iiq|rqi'JTqi’gm- 
qRfiqqiqrfqqiqisFq =q 3T?qrqqT^iqFq:q^q^Tq: ?qi^q i 3{?qqr 
^tqfq'iqrq q^qf^qfr-^iq^iqiq'T t^qqfqFq ^^5: 1 
«ftq q^qi^qST^ ^fqeqqiFq qqq.?qqFqcqr^TFq 5qq?q?qi?qqT- 
iFq^qiqtqTq 1 qqqqr qq^qT FqqiF?>qqT?^q:Fq-q:qFqqiq3SlFq5q 
'Tf^^ft^qqt ?iFqqq I qq ffq^iqfcqqjqi^q^^qq^'JstsTFqqrFrq 
rTqifqqqltq;qqFqqqfcqq>^:qTqf5qqi^q|Tq?q^qqufqH'^^Fq^^: ! 

^^q^qqqrFqfqs^qqiqrq ?qrqq, qi^qq, 3Tq qaf 

fFqqjqqrit Fqq[q ?Fq =^q ? ^gnfc^ ?qTcqFq 

g^Fqq, ^rqFqq, ^fqriq f?qqmqqF^ 1 q^^qFqqfq^- 


qjt qr qr sqra: ? srt qq ?Tf qpTFRT^- 
fipfeq55q|q^ff%qf^q?5Rr^5i^q|5nfeqn' qmTfrf^- 

^q: ‘qqqqfrRqq ^fcT i cT%fqqf«iTqifenqf- 

qtq^ I 5!«TTf^ ^qiTfqq^ q ; ’ 5gfqqn q^3 rT fe < | q ?qqts?iTcfr- 

s?q?ft ^R^:p:q^qjwq ?% q5«q^ l qq ^ Rqg qq rgsf fq 
5ic?«iifq?qtq>rc»^srq 1 ar^ qq ^ q qq qnf: qqf^csrr- 

?«rrqF5TTqR®r?qFq i qqr q>q>R2q>K^ 

qfqq q^^TqT^qjusdr^Pr^qf ^55«r% arsq^sfq ^ 
mqjg: 5r5^iq I ^ qrgqJTF^T^fWs^qTq i 

qrqqJifcf^qqFq arsir^: qrs^s^qqtqr^r ^njitrisq: i 

arsq^qnf^qrfq qt^qr^rfqsq^^q ffT?qftcimir<cqqfq 
3T?cJ>q—«p>s??ftsrqqcr ^qW: I qT^Jl^sfq arsq^sq^^- 
qtq snq^ft q^q^q fq^tqqq—3Tqq?5T^qTJrq qpqsqrP^- 
qR?%qrfqqnTTq i qq q 

‘fq^fqjftqgsTTcq: ^sq: ^^qiq^ l’ 

55qT^q—wrq^T^qTFqtqqVqf ^rtqqpfT^qr q 

Fq^qqrq i 


‘^qt |qfq qsw qpq qffqqtq q i 
q'sffq qs^q qf: qqr n 

qqt: jqqrqr^^q q^sifqqjT: i 
qfrrpqsrqtqtsqqqrsqr^rgqiqFq iF 


g^jfrPTRtcFt I qqtqrqqrqftrrq i ‘arr^q^ 

qqi# qi^TcfTT q?q’ g qj^qqrq qqf^^fq ar^qifq^fq sqqj- 
qofqT55TFqq?q«sqrq q q qqT^fqg qRq^ \ qfqig arsq^i^sf^ 





^5?: I Ji«TT f^iTrr^srq ^i\ ^z I ^ ^ 

^srT^r^cTTJTfcr 3T5 ?tt^ ?t q^cqf'T i am 

^^^^cT?TT?T Jf5#^^fH^T ^n^cftqfeg 1 

3FJT«TT 5rs?T«Tqcqqnt ^ w^ ^nfmTT^T^mrtr- 

r!cqF^mqq4mq^?5T^: ?t qs^q^^jqrof^qc^Tf^fqjf^im- 
i ir^r g ^ ^< 11 ? ^iiffTT^r^ qw«frfts«f- 

m?TcKT^^'^ qr^q^cq q#fT cT5T ^q^f cT tr^ f^Tf^cT5im 
^irfF?5r55r aifq Ff arsf^cf tr^—F^qife- 
I ri^Fqqr^’irq f^isrr^^qJT^g^TFq "|r^?Tqf^qm^?JTT%%^r^’', 
“T?JTJT55^%qr^5" ^c^t^Ft ^r=^^vrqf?fT ^ 5 arq^sTT qjsrf^^Fq 1 
3T^ qq f%F^|^5irrrT^’^n=qc^ aimc^ =^t^^ttt^: f^^rsf^tqr- 
feT^iT55tqtqfeqTT?Ttzft, 3T2mr?r%vq: q^ =q q^f^, ^^T^SqiTTtn:- 

rTT^q ^qqqfqciTr^ ^^qTfqqm q5:qFg^ ^Tfn-:, 
3T?q^ qm ?q^q^qqtFcq qiqif-^^rsqqt: 'sftfqqr^qf ^sfq 
'3T5Tsqjfq^q qi^qq qr fq^fqqr 1 

q^q sqraFqq srqc^ n’ 

5 fq I qTgqjT^rq^l fq?q7:qt fq^Fqq^qc^ 1 g qcqrqiqTqfvT- 
fq%5T:—^iftqiqRcqn^ I q^q qqqrqqt^^: qfqq5q%5iq5q: | 
qqiq: qqiecqqrq: qra^iq; f^q^T^t qi arqrq'tqrqT^Fqq^q^q- 
^q^5fqq5r?^qTqrfqmq|rq^Fq qrq^ qfqsi 1 qq qr 
^iqqTlqfq^fq^^qT q^T qtq^ 1 q^q-qqf: qfqsqrqF ^5- 

oqTfqqTFqqRqTfq^^jlfqD 5 ;^q^yf 5 ^qf^q^jf^ I JrqqqT- 

q^^q^sqqrqTqTqqqg^qfqrqqicqqrqTfq—?r^qi^rq qq ?Fqr^ I 

rqqic’qtsfq qqrqr^m: qrrrq qTfoiqgq^c^ l q 5 q^^q qc^q^^q 
fq-qrc^ 1 qqr q qqq qqqf^fq^ qfqqj:, q^q armtfqFqfqq- 
^q q^qf^: qqq: q^q'tqrq^qRqqqi qqfq^q^ 1 qqq =qrqt- 









%fcT% cT«IT ITT^ftllT: ?T%?TT: q^f^rT I ITSH ^ q^- 

qf^q?r% i ct^tt ff 

%^\ qr=qq^^r>TTqt fri-q: q^f^qq i ar^ ^^^qFvr^qqvzTTHq^Tiq 
sTHT^fgqRTRTTq# f^^fTT^qf^qt^Ts^q^q^: I qqq 
qlqTTq^ffsfq 3T?iiTqTqlqTqi%r^qTTiRfqTq?^q fqq^fw i qr^r^ 
qRy^qifq 5i?qT?^TT5q^'itsrq r^c?qqTq?qR> f^q^qiqr^fqq^t 
q^T—aRqqmq^qnrq i qq^ q%qq^qtqqf^: qpqqr i 
5q^qcqfq?IT3tq;rqTqfq *£f\qfqR5^Tlf%affqq l ar^r =qT^q%5T5f%: 
‘q5iI^q=5^aftcq?qKq5<t^-qw I 

f^;qqcq?qqT qqmT^fq^ ^fq: ll' 

?rq I qfr^qj«sft«ftq.03qTqT: 

‘qqtscq?qq fqf^Ff =q^?qq qifqqq’ (?q. q. <^1^^ ) 

fcqT?r:qq>qq I qqfq qr^fqqrqp^fqj: ^q^snrgqRq^^Tqqqqq- 

qrfq qqfq i qqr^qrq-qq^qmtfq’q- 

q^qqrt fqqjfqgqr qq^c^q, fqqq^q ^q^^rqq^qqqT qq^ic^ i 
q^qifq ^qqrrqf^qjqf^f'Jsf^Rqr: ?:q^T^qTcqq^Fq?|?q^qsT^ 
qg^^qq qq q^qrq ?q^q qq fqmf^q: i qq^T^r^qfqq f^55 
?q^q qq ^^T55q;^q>qTqTqTFq%^^5d<qq qrqq^qTq^qrq^q 
qfqfq q?:-fqqq^i^ qiqfq i q^i%qq>jfq5^q qq 8qq-^=5#5Tqt- 
fJtqqcqqFqqtrq^qfeqT^rqiqqTqT^ airq^Rr^qr f^qfq: i q qq 
fqqq: ^qqmq^qftqq^q^ q^qTfqqf^qqT q^qr qq^q STfq^q 
^q^qqq: qq?r^ i fqRJTqqqRfqf^^q q^gq: q^Tfqq^rqfqqrq- 
qiqrf^fq: i ^qf^q q gq^fq fq^qiqgqfq^rqqg^^qq qq 
qqqfqfq I ^^^qisqqf^g^^qr q^qqqmq^Fc^q q^i qqqqt 
q^Jrqq^ I q cqq qjqifqq^q: q:fqqg i q^qfsq^ 'sr^fq' 
fqqq^ g qfq\ ‘q^ar’ fFq i tqqfq q ^q^rlfq qfgq: qf^ 1 









37«it^ 

'sr^T5T^zTl^r^'siTr?^Ti^R> r^ ^ttwrr: l’ (ar. a. f%. ■R^) 
I ^?5cT: q^T>l|T- 

r^q^T5f%5t ^^Tcirq? (1^, 

fq=5#?5Tfqq^qi5ifqq?ffciqf I 
cTr gW^Tq^fqfcT qsT?r?qv[r^t 

qoTmfq ll’ 

I qq arsq^qf^^f^^ ^^5iqqt ^ssq: i 

F^qcT^rcTfi;—arqJTT tT^ Hqf^: l q^lfq |qV3qt^R> IfJTTT^r 
3ifq q'q?:, q^q ^qTfqqTqf^rq5rg;q?q^q>if?rqi^q qq-1 ar^qqT 
|1^: Hq?TqqtqT?% q^^Tf^'^qi'n^T^qi^^fq^qT fqqjeq- 
q1^^cqqqT<<TT: ?q: l arq qq fq^I^ ?iqf qq ^qflT: ^TH^Tq 
qqcq^^^r ?Trq%^f% ^^gffcT | q5RTr«r- 

q>RT5T^q^f?q#q qT<ir qTqql^^TT^sfq qi qfsqqfe^’qT^Is^^q- 
qqqj *TTq^sa5tq;qi^g^;n;Tr?tqTqqqq^qTr5ErqT Fr^Fq^r 

q^F^q^q qr^qi^ I ??qqjT?5^fe^qJrq q^q—q?5^: q^m^i: I 
qF? q^^qrq-qiq qrqtq-3Teq^^XJT_3Tq'ciT^%qi5( ^Fq qiF^qqjqr- 
siFqqTqqqF^, q^qFqFq g ^cq;?^ qq 1 wq qtq^^qifrq 
^rrqqjqqTqr ‘qqq^q?q%qi?qjTfq?ij^> ^cqifq^^q qfqj ^qqj^qr- 
Fqgrq qcqqqqrqqrFq I qqfo^q ^ q^qqiFq qf^^S^Fqfq- 
q^qiqfFq Fqqqqqr^^q | F?qqq—qqfeqq^qiFfqqqrqfq- 
qrFqi^qftqt qqq qqqrq?^ Fqqq ir^ q'^iJrqq^ qqt^ ^q^RR^qf 
q^qfriqFqqqtqqFq’^q ^^qqrqi^Fq i q qtq fcqTfqqrqriq;- 





iTtnT?fET^^Tgf=^^^<iI?cff^5TtvT¥'TTJTT|^?Tr??5TT^iI’jr?T q«Trret^F^- 

q? %T^ smfq i srift ^rqjRrin: FfSTFcTir-^: 

RM 5fE^'t¥5Tq^Tr^«T^r qqjf gfs R^ift- 

?RRW|Tfq qs55if^?TTcqq^qJT^¥q^r F^st^t: 

qi?5R^^T:, ^ qT55T F^?riT?cRT F^F^^^R-^, 

«ft^i?irFR5iT#j F^T^Fq^T 

‘m 5 ^qjRT^^'f^T^Fq'ifl’ i’ 

5FcT I Fq^jjf^qr ^qJTTT^RcRTcj, ^^>sFq FR’^q’^pFc^TfeFcT F^t^^- 

RR?Rqj^'if?R q55RJr^T f^qj?q^T ? ?Fct =tq—3T?qcq^ 

^^ Fq^qR^R^mflTflF^^qJTq I ^^TiFt =R ^RIcTf^zir^^ 
q>TT^sFq sT^^q^^^TRqiFRjft, 5«TT ^^iFq 3T?5 ^ F^'d^R: 1 qR^TR 
R<irfqqFri: 13Tq^«iT ^cRtgsi^os^^T^sJTiF^R'JT^ ^JTR^TRt q^^r 
an^r^q^: qi’Js ?F^ i ^qq^r^^qJc^sFq e^TT^r- 

qjT^cTT I ^q g F^sf 

^f^qF^r I ^i^iqTqRtar q^^qRR^'tqqm^qr ‘argqqrqcqq’ ^=5^^ i 
FgqTqFqqiq^ =q Fgq>TfqRtqt I qrq%sFq 3T^- 

qrqiFqqtq: I qq^TR qgqT^R'qq 

5rq^eqfqqTqTcTtscq'q% jq: I 
q^pj^iqFq ^^qqqrq ?qm% qq: ii’ (?q.Fq. <9) 

%k\ 5^5 qgi^is’nt Fq^qqFq qr arq-q^rqjJrq i qqfqg qqife- 
5rT^^ FqqqFq^q^qq arg^^qqerrT^STq^qTgTqsqt ^cR^gq- 
qq: I q^q^RT: qj55i qq ^TqqiqiqFq^frqgqTqqjr: ‘^q^r:’ 

^^qq: I ^q^qf^q jqsgqFfq g=qqF?q Fq=q- ^q =q ^q^qreqrq 

TTF?q 1 qq q^qqTqf^ q^Tqq-q> qqFq, ?q =q ari^q 




V30 


q^rq'\f5t^r 


^rr^f^q^i: ^^'^l^^-I^R^TT^cITf^^t r=^?T^fti- 

^rar^ir 

^qf?8T:. ^qi^q i qq ?rqq 

qq? qqqi qrq’q^q?^rq:q5q;T: sTrfq^r-qT: ^^\^ 

■qdv-ils^M^rqqiqi srqnrq^ ^whhi; ^Fcqqri=RcT^ ■qfrT^- 
^fisq<iiqq feqqjq ^^q^qyqqf^q, 3 ??ji«tt Jr^qTqT'jq'T^fq^qTq i 
^fq q-qf^ql^Tcq^qfq’q TqJtrTqfq’qicqqj q5q^q ^ q:T?5q 
3T?qqf^qt^qqtc^Teq?q7: ^qicqfq ^r^r^iqi: ate^rq- 

eqq ff;qi¥qqqi ^qfiqrq’qTqqq'Jifq^siqq^^ir ?iqqrif^qqit 
^5r^qqTqT*“qq-^q:, qqq^TqqfHfqqqramTfqq^^iT^qsqqf^^'if- 
■qqifq Mi^^iicMch'qRd'^'iij-'Mdqi Mrcivi'vMii'd-4r^^^- 

^jqiq-qfq^Tfj^q’^q ^qqc^TTqfrrqTqq^yr^qqc^ fq^si^cq qq- 
fqqT^rq q’qfJ^Rqq;qt?5T^I^r fqfq^iqrqT: qtqqqq^^T^TT^qqq* 
qqqqq^r araFTqqqrfqqqT =q q^rfqqtfqsnqqqqH ^ fq^| 
qqgt 'SR^q’ q^^qq qqq^ qfg: 1 q|Tfi ^RtqtqTqfqqiqfqsirq^qt 
‘q: 3 t ^c^qq Tqf^qrfqfiq^qT qTgq5T’ f^Tfq I % 5 '^r' 
5,^^qq5^q:qTqjTKi?iT^ fciqq: 1 trsi- r^f|^q)-n: qq;Tq:T?rrrfqqq' 
?qq?qt fqqq ^^fq sqr^qe^^ i ^ffqcqq^q '^q^q' 

?c^qf?5Tr?q I ?q?qq =q fqjpqf^iqq I ?q^qi^ qfe 
qfcq^^^qjq'q qw^q^q q fqjfqtqq I qt =qq q?5q^q q f^f^q I 

q^qiq ?q^q qq q5qTfqqr^^T^'q ^qq^q^Kifcqq?!—tj=6t5?5^i 
sifqf^fq qc^qtqqtfq-q^fq^isq^TjrJi^ fqq%q: ‘^q??’ — 

fqjfqf ^yqicqqicqTq i q q ftrq^fq^q: qTqpqfq^qicqT qgqr^qr- 










ciq I ‘3n?Ilfel«IJT: ^S^^TPTJIT: «RI>iq1»l?r ?ft>T^T 5I?q^5y- 

^qr^rf: ‘3f«i3irT^% ^ ?^^ni?rr: i 

I ^I55gRr: ^ ^c%frT I 

5ft^ ^ ’Rtit ^ 5?r^, 3rm?^omfq 

qq oiJT^qq, qqqij^—arqJT^iJfyT aff^qTJnjfJT ^ aRlfeqrrq I 
^ JpJTt ^^^\: a5^^0TT^qts?qqr^qtsfq ^ ^m\: ^TerrcJT^ I 
ar^-fSfq ^ ^ ^^: i q^ =qi^ 

snq^qr i qtq ^ m\ —aFir^jn^mq, sif^qpf ^tfct 
qT?rftqfTO^gsiTf^qc%?r ar^mq i sn^oriqfe^qjmrq?^ e»ft^ 
qrqqif^^TPTT m >i%fe?5q^i^?T«iT?crT ^qrcqig- 

q^^^qq^JTiqi q<N=^ fwcqqj^srqq^^qrqr 
qqqqtwrf'qi ^T=5q^r^q>Tf^^qRam?Rq>icHJTi qf^iort, 

?R?m5Hq5q1fq?q?qTf!T, a^^ftqqciRr %qfn^qmr 

^?iRTq (qtfq:) i ?r»rT ?r#2frq^Tlf<^q>^ a?^ a?W5 
^ aq?5 l^g ?r^q;T5j ^ an^Tar-aqjsr» 

aRqifa^ RJ?Tqf^9T i a^nr^—a qa 

^ q<iif: srqa q^q«rFaqqqiqFqcqrf?^q5icqqiaTq>qiqqF8ar^rcq 
R^qrf»q%, 

‘qa fqqzfq^?T ^afar^rf^jaq q>‘^®itq>5qTq i 

3rgT^5rfe^?r ^feraarsar fafe: ii’ (ar. q>T. v^) 

ifa qa qa acaar: qi^a^fsa^qi: qrm qaaaar, aatajq 

‘?aajqTa7:q ar^a 5ra;a: aa^Raar: i 
aa: 5r5aT5%^a a faar a^a't^a: ir (ar. ^\. 

5% I aar 

‘q^T^aTaiqia^a^a a: aaTat:p;a: u’ (ar. a^r. 





vs^ 

^fssaqiTT'n^cqTctT^^iTr- 
^TTWfTOFitJT^'ifqrSTTlNIWi^^i^^^'Trfef^^T ^vTc^R'T)^- 

'?T^!in^^4^Tt^'iqT f^^H^TT 1 

^trumw ?:^=5sqT ii’ (irr. f^. 

‘?T cim ?f5i^; iftf^ i 

ll’ (qT. f^. ^l^V3) 

m<?%?SFirr qr^q^TT ii' (qr. fq. ^R<i) 

^ I crqqr^T^T q^ETfq qqf^ST qTqT-qRT^ I q^q ^qmr 
■^■'^c^HlPcH^il v.I W:, ^^^^qiclIrHchyqNMteM- 

qq^T^'dqt q^qr qi i q?qqq q^qm: 

‘^q'^qfTqT^qqqcqJT^qjq^qr i 
q^T qqqrft r?|^ qjq^ ^-<qt ?qq^ || 

^qr: ^qqiqq'tqt q: q'tsfq^^: q^r?q: i 

qqifqqqTiTfcrqVqt^q^qg^Tfqfq: II 
qiqqi^: ^q^qqyt: ^qqqqq^TTfqfq; I 
siq^ qfqqTq^TT: ?qq%qqqT^q;: II 

^?qq%qq qiq qqrqfqPq qoq'^ I 

qmfqqqqqfq^t q^qi^^^q qiq^ 11 

ff^ffqifq fq^cf ^ qiqqiqjq: | 
qr^'^qq^qqiq'iq: qq^^qpqt qq; || 

5cqTfqqit q?:q qq gT^qi^ fq^cq^ j 
qc?qq%qq qtq:qfq=5#?qqTqqq II 










^crf ?iwf^^qTf?^mfrTtsciTf^^^ i 

^qmr'T f| ?rm ii 

^^^qm^fJTTrcrm I 
?^¥qFT5fff m qT^TT^3: II 

^rgf^^q^rRcqTfiF^^q^T^Tmq^ i 
qq^ qR^3T ff ?r sfig ii 

3TqT^e?’qT5H%rf5I^5T%: q^sf f^srf^: I 
3 TcT: II 

^5rq5T^qT^mrqTf«TTqiwr^Fq5qt^TJ^ I 
qfr^'q 5qqfq^TTFq55OTJ^ II 

?qmTf^qjiT^T?fFqc5Tc?f?q;T^q>^eT'n^ I 
^Fq^Rirqt ^qTT|Fq^^3TRqqj^^ il 

cT^q TTiqqTT^q q^igtqi fH^ ^5: i 

q^Ti^qTfqq^rqJTt s^i^qR^q^qq: 11 

o 

atq> F^rq^f^^q^qqj^ i 
F5rq5Tq?qt?:g 11 

qT^?:?nTiqF^5fir?R?qqTfMt 1 
3i??r;?qf^qq?qqTTqTfqqT^53: 11 

qgtqf¥q Fqqfq qFs^^q'qqtsi^r 1 
Fq?iq ^Fq 11 

3i3^qqrqFqt ?r qq FqFq: 1 
3T?qT^q 3 qTqtqrs«f 2 ^TF?r^FqqT 11 
qrqpqT^»=5zi F^^q ^ft^q I 

q^5T:^q5TFq^q5qqq?Tqrf?qqJT II 


V9^ 






V5V 

r=^^r spTfqrarq^rirqt^ i 

3T?m: ^TTfiT II 

5 ft^' siTTt^ qRHif«i?^ I 

fq?fTiTT ^5: II 

^qfqcq^q^q q^in<iIT q^qi^cIcTT I 
Fq?Tq? 5 ^?:Rqqi^ 11 

^q^qqFf qt sri^T^q?^: 1 

Fe 55 iTf^'^q 5 ^?T II 

qif^iq’j^^lgsftri:^ qtf^ffts|^qra% I 
fqoff^ qerFrqfqff li 

o 

qqr ?frqgqT55f5q q^^qTtT^Jx^Sl^t ^^fk^ 

gfeq ?TTq!JiT ?5 qqftrg: 11 

?qq1f 5 5qqf^S??IT^^^ Hfqq f^ qr: I 
qqrqTs^gfqjqi^sqq^qr^ qfq^p^q: II 

^qifqqqf^qtqq^qrFq: qqjst^q^ 1 
ar^qrqiq^qqTq'qm?! qJT^ifcf^sfq qr li 

c 

^qcq^f ?lfqqT q^: ^^qqqtscqqq I 

q: qqqtqTqqqqqfMq qqf?qqT 5 ^ 11 

ssft^q^TT^q fq'qf^Tt ^q qq;^ qtqq;: 1 
qqg qqqi qr^i fqjj^q =q q^^ftr: 11 

5 T<if qqfcq^^yqi r^^qi^qt fqq^'^: 1 

3ri^qq«T<qi^eq q^^qicqfq f^sqfe: || 

fqqqjf^^qi^qq ?qcft 7:^1^ 1’ 



'I7:^%3T'I^T>^T^^H3j5'^r3>^3T^JT^^f^^T5*^3>5®I^^?^■ 
aTvsiff ^TTf'nsiq^r^l et qs^arq 

f^^srqaf qfcqi^^ %X. 3ft|r>T5^ 

fq^iF^rq arfefe fqqf^Fq sr^m? 

r^Fc’qt qff f%?r*Tf^fiT 3T?!T^^5 
^|3Tq55T^ fq^f^'ift an^T! q'?:q? 5lf^ 31^ 

3Tq^ ^=qqcq 5 VT^q^fq |q arie'^T 

f^<q fq^q: ^qif^ fqqi? ar^r^ 5^’ 
^itaiqqq 3 t?^ qq fq^ 3TqR^?:55 q|?ft si?qtq 
qT?:5qrq sq fqqq? fq^sraig qtf^r si arf^r qq«? 
afF^qr sifqFqqfcft ar^sq^^qi q^^3?f?: qFc^q^qF'q 
q'Es; arg^ qr^Fq^q ^^sia^qr 5 ^ qf^qFq^^ 

i^Fq Fq^q arq ^5 asissqqft qqar^ST^^qT I 

J^q^^T^qicq^^^FqFq q^qj^ ‘q?qqts^TTqrTT?q’ icq^qWiTT: 
f 55T5qi ^Tqj: qfssrq^: ^ Fq?q?:qt Fqorfq: i q«iT5^^ 

qqr Fq^Fqqq i Fq^^^ Mi^qq^- 

I qof fq^qt 3I^?iqTq*t fqqtqqiq^t^r: ?q^qqt 

^yF^'t ?qTqT^ I qqi q%q Fsqqqrq^q^rq^q 
«s?yqFqFq giqcq^t ^y^-qt, 5 q?ilq arg^^ qw ar^^qs^g 

Fq!Fq?rTF?q—aT?q5% qqif^Tqn^, ^qm^^q- 

q^Htq^qtq^^rq^qrqTFqqr^qq aqq^qr qiqi 1 

Fq^qT^sgfTT^q^qFqqjq’qTq q^qpqTTqqn:— 

qF?rqqqFq 

<35557^ ^ 





qci?njftf^3n^'t 

?IT^ II ?o 11 

^ir ^g^ccfy 

O N 

3T?qt=5^ ^ ?T«I^- 

u w 

o 

^?^%?1Tfwfecl: II 

^ ifSinfcT cI?T 

»F^^nrjf ?TT: I 

o 

3mtm^FRR^f?T 

s 

•JEts^ ^^TJIcSlfq II 11 

sr^TT?i?f^arr 

^35I^^fifVT: II 11 




sqtfHF^'t 3TTq^ \ 

N 

mfTT: 

iftTit^^qf M n 

fe;gT 

g?y^T3^Tf%7ft»Tnr: I 
3TFTc^ 5 t^ 

ST^'tf?^: II II 

STS^f^cf ^^T 

ngr I 

3T^?r %;5T: 

?n«i^f7cT ^ II ?V9 M 

3T gg^ =Tq 5^ >SC^ 

. II ?<: n 

5i^i%5r5q^TJTqr?T^pT3JR^nTnT|if^r* 
^T^:, ?T?ir ^ttt q^^T’aq? JsftiicTO^ifTrTqiJn 

^?ir|eT5F?ir^q^ JT^q^T qcfRf^qTc’rq^' q^'qi^t^T 
cqqs^irr q^ i =^ 5?^^* si^i \ 












vsd 

| 3T5fT^nHTiTrcH^?!TJrmrq ST^qFi 
«it'3:rt qlfq^qiT^: ?T^:—3T?cq:?n?iq:?^q-^q|5TTf?rH: 

c o 

I 3TfcTTf^fq"aqiirH^=sy^fTRrfq:f3?TqT^5^qT- 
sinqqj qf^rf 

%q?5':q?q7T?vfw!^-qfv=^q^?T% 1 q^g qm^T f^rq- 

q^^^'qq I srq qqi^iq ^Ti^q 3?^ ^ jq’?qqqT qqq fqq qqq- 
rTti'Tqts^tq 13Tq5qrqF;«*qT3'r^omfcrr^iT^i arfq qrq^Hi^qi^T- 
=qF.qfT5n^^^ ^qq5Tr?Tfq?5mqr=£^mfeqfqqv5rgqf'^^qT5Tq- 
fqqftqrqqT qq^gq^Tt^q ?qq^rq i qq^qqi^- 

si%5T qq 'q^sq^sgqfq^sf^q ?q |qr qii’ ^^^q^s^rs^^fcj-q^-q. 
^R^;, 3tfq ?,q-'m'^<Hl-Fj|ircr'^4. N-^.-’d: I 

^qrrqqf^q fqq qf^ ^Traqrai 
q'T qfqq q^^q^qrqq ^ mq;: i 
^fqq^q^rrqqq^qfT^'qq-qi 

M^q^qvTTT ^fqqr ftqfq; ?q.Tq ii 

*J|qq q^q ?qiq 

‘qq:5;qcqm5TTrgjqq qqqsTTqqqqi 

^'q^qrqFqT F^qqf^qqR^q fgqq r’ 

^fq I 3Tq qq qrt'ii^ ^qqrf^qqfr, Iqt qqiq-qqqqrqqVq^qT 
fqcJ?rq-qqqqq^'nq ^ftqRqq5rqqqq--?fq ^qqrqt qs^iq), 
ql’TT'JiTqfq 3nq?^rfsqrqqTTqfq%TtqTwq^qqtqq?^q 

C\ Ci 

1 qqi^qqrqqqfq ?qqqrqfqfq*qif?qqtitq, qqtsfq sirq?^- 
F-sqfq:?T-<wimqf%q^<qq:-?R¥qrq^sr^TTfq^5nq sriqfq^viqqq 
q^-^tfq qfef?^q^5^q5qq?qqqgtrqqTqiq,. srqt^q 






g g^ar^Tif i’ 

^rgg;'jf ^r ii (fq. %. 6 ) 

sfq I qqqTq^qqtq i^q i qqtq^ f^^pq-qqr^ 

'3iTq-?qqT: g;3rT qt fq^'tq q^eqi^q; i 
Jcq^qTfqqpqf^ cqqfqqqf^^iq ll' 

ffcT I ^rq ff ^srgqTgfq^—^Tqfeqr^r^HTi^qrej; i ^qqr^ 
jFTTq-'^ffT 3Tf^qfgqJr, feqrqgT qf|: I qtt'j fqqrfq: 1 srgql^r^ 
qqqqr fqqqqr^q i sr^qrf^qr^'q ^iq^rqcqTrq^ f^qr^Tfqi- 
^iqq’qqTfiq i qq qf^^JS qwq^ricqqj 

rqqq>q qts^qiF^qqj^ i qgr qgg^rqf^q 3jq ^ Fqq^qf 
qsgOTqTqt^t fq^fq:, q^qi-q: qc^g^qg^r^q^^T qqf^q ^qq— 
qqtfq qsg^qrqlf^ q^gfq qrqq q^qTq^^'qrq^rq^qRgqi 

fq^q^q:, arq i ^qrg^TTgqi^q q^qg q^- 

qR^^q %?i%qq5q>^qq'qr q^TRiq^'tqT^qr qqrfTT^sfqvirq^; 
iffTqfq^, qqr qqqFqvTifq, q fqqtqrqi^rr sjqriTr-qr: qcq- 
«T^?^Tq?q?^rq ff qqiq I ^qf Fqqt^qTqiq-qr—sTJjqq'qf: =qcqT^: 
q: qrqqfRq^^ i q^sq qq^q—q^m^^RT %q^q i ^qqraq- 
qFqqsqif^Tq^qg %^^rq qiFq^rRrq^tgqjRqqT qr qqrqqq^^r: 
RTRFq q^j^qg %€i%qq^^ft>TqqTqTqT ^^Tc^:q^^'qaqqqi%- 
qivqT^q qr q^q •q^qTRqr Fq^fqqqgvTt qFq^ig | qq\q>g 

‘qq'gq^qqRqjq qqRqrFq qi^Fq i 

f^q qtqgq'TRr qqq qqq^fq: ii’ (^. qt. ^i^») 

?Fq I ?=5t^?^?T^RqFq sTrq^q^rqt q^qg q'fcq argqcqr Fqsqr- 
jjrFqiq^^q qq'^q ^qFq^^Rq, q^q aTq^tsTrqEqqroirirq^wq q^, 
qgq g^r qcqrF^^rg •q?:q^qr^eTqT q^'^^qq^^Fqjqqqf^qrFq 




<i® 




q^: I 

•\ 

^i f^ 5 ^T.'^ ^sOTqiwf^q^ir 

?cqTf^, I 3nq5=55if^ff siq^q^^qr ^'nf, qj^r 
cT??^aj ZTlffT^qq^Tr^^T: gqf^q^l^—feqiMq'JT^ I 
f^, e^rq fgvrm q^’jjqiqqfq ^q q^^r: i qq qVqrqr 
5 q^fqjqiriqfqrqqFTT qtqTvqTq 

q?q5qi]( I 

?=53TfqqT^'iT cTrftqfq^s^T, ^^qfq^qTqqTfqqq 
=q5^5r qrqTf^^ramfq fqfqqFrqife i qq>sq?^i^ 
^q^qrfq 3T5fTTq^^T?qqts?q: 3Trq?5: —q^if^ 

^nq?iqci i 

fsfTTqTtoT q^qrq=5ST^ qq?:q5ii^^^^cTqt?rTq^n^ artqw 
qRTfTq^Tqiqi qq^RT:, qT^qTRifqjqqT qq 
fq«ft’qT?qTf^qqT|^TTRqT 3i?cT:qffq:—f^^rfeqqq^q^q- 
?%qTf?qq^ 1 

qfJtqRqqj^fHsqfqjqtitq qqtq q^qq^rq i qqr q^qqTqr 
q?qr q^qRifT^iqt qqqfqqiqt qq, qqifqq qqfq, 

qqr %qt^%q -f^qf^qqqfq^^q qq^^qqr ar^qqi^ i 
q^rsqtsq i 

q55rTq5rfqifeqT5Tf^Rq^'tfe^qqTfrqqfq-;sq:TTq?5q^fFqqt- 
q^qc^ q^i qffqif%f^t, 

gcftq ^^ggqTcqqf qq, qq qq fqqt^t:: ^q^qqqi qq^qsj 
qq^T^q: qqNfiq I 












''■?ttT?r¥rfT^nm=^Rf:aszTRJTl^clT 

3TST 5Fti=^g,c^i3^JTT =^3'^! f^T^nf^^i^T 

^^5q1>T &r[ 3rf 3^ ^^=5t5T^' fgsTl^?ziTqT?q 3T-^q 
^STHTf-q^^ I 

sqi'fqTcfqv^'q qq^fq cr^itor i 

qrftq q^=5t5i^' q^iq^qig, sr^q^^TT qq sTTqi^qqr, 
qqi qq^ 51 fqqt^TT-q^^q q^: %qqt qq3q^5q ^q qf^q 
sqtqicq I 

qqq q^q q^', q^q^rqq fqqt5Tpqqqr?q^ 
c^cqi qqqi^q I 

?=5^T fq^^qqrq'q^^TTqqf^qr ^^iqJrsq'fqq^r q^T^i^fq 
qqr fq^fq^qq^T^^fq fq'qrq srferq aiqqfaT q^TsqiqmqTqi iq^^i 

o 

oqtq^qFqq^qfq^rfq, qqTqq^Tq^c^q^TsqtqT^qfqgrg qtfqq: 

qcq=5q^ 

O 

‘^ft^T^qfqqTqtsrq sgcqiqjq q q>?q^ i' 

^cqifq I 

3Tqqt=q:oqTc^qT q^qqrq^qq^qqiq^qqFq’jf ^r^qr q||^^ 
qqg—qqrgq^qqq^qqifeqt qqfq qqr 5i1q;eftq^ 
^qqiq-q^^^, ^^=5q^—fq^sf^^^crq^^qqqTqT fqfg^^^q^^Tqr 

qrqifeqtq^t =qg;^5qtq*55feqT q^qf g^rr qqrf^q eT^T^q* 
?q?5?sqT I ^qrf^ ar^^q ^q qqtq 

fqqqf^q f^sftq^qrqq^^qT-^qTq^qqqcqRqqr arP^qqq’' I 
qgfq q^q jq^fq q^t qqrq^qfqqfq qqr, qqr q^qr^q 

qi^^qq q:—sr^qrqjfqfq g^qq^ i srq qqq%q 
(rqfqqqtsitfq^qT^qqqTq 3n=5^Tgqqqqq«^ —^fq q^rqqiqj- 
r^qqt*tqt=5q^ I 


'TTmr^ifiT 


'^T^r?T ift^riicj; r 

?cirTf? 

'tT-sft^TTJT^ ^Tsf qTfj^ETT^l?T l’ (^T- ?l<i5) 

?c3TTf^, ‘=^q?5T3^ ^ fcJ^^t^TFcT” 

qcT^ ^^c^Tr^^cTiJ^sfTc^jr rci5Tt?rF?T?mF-si^ ^T^TTciT- 

fTrsrsrr^ st^t ^fffsr^JiFirfT 

’«#^Tf^?wi'T?TTT'jr?T cTfi— 

fq’jfra =tci?^T%^T I 

q^tn^^TTfcirq:! ^rsfsqrfHw I qtFrsqTrFT^g qf^'if qnt- 

qt^T, ^^q^^aiTf^TqT^di g f^qtjffin-, gT??Tql’sr?r?«TTf^^l^r'a‘T- 
^^3[5Tr=q58q?{qTfRqq qi^^ftfcT^^^, 3T?^: %«ftqTF8[?r q^^T- 
tWFTTriFn ¥iqiqH^.f^u| ^ ^Jjfe^fTFrTT ^ 

5]^^ I 3T8 ^ 5TqcqTcJT I cf 

J(Fq^q%%^qT ^'4R5qq:f5rq^5rHTfe5Tqq?TcTTsRqqT*:fiqrTraqi?i2rr* 
^Tsrr ^lITcq>JrTFqr%qTr|qqfrrFcTTTcqqTmcJT!iq[q^5m: qqTcTrr:, 

I q^^ftqrzfTS^—"fT^: qqTf»3;RtTffq^#|fTT» 

3T'^^^5q:q:'JT^zft?5T^ qf^ciir ^ \ 

^s^rfoMq^'trcT: I %gicr: q^s^T, f^rr ^st arfcr^Tqf^^cf— 

5Tf5T ffiircri^r: qJT^^r^q:, cr^—gT?qft^T5r^TqqiFTipq?7- 

C\ 

^qq>t ^Flrq'^r^q, qrcq^tqr qlr^ft^^” Til ^qqf%^5r^q^Fi- 









O ^ 

5^clIT =^rl^ ?T?^^ f^«ft- 

tiTI?cT^—^Waf^^irfc’fTSSJT^, ?FJ7r^=^^—rlf^i^g’qTl-^5ff% f^^T- 
5TS5^T^ir I q^iT 3TiTR^?^JT?f^^q' 'STF^cTT- 

^ ^^^ffSnTi=cf#f%v:?I’RZTr^>5lH^q;^ 1 c?|- 
^[Ht JT«TT^T^ ^?JT5^fEf^rq^Tt?T I CTcfPT 

qrq:—irfer 5T-^ q5^qq?fn, ?t^tr- 

^5T3fr; qsTqT^,Tg;fcT: I ?TT =^Tq^5T^ qF^ 
a^: ^f^qcTT i aF^r q^^qqrqrfq =q ^qi tf^^orq 

qj^iFr i 3Tq tFq^qr^qqr^q m aifqq-srqqfFq^Ts^Fqf^qT 

aFcT5TRq aFq^^f xfi^pq^qT i 

'»^TFq^q^F'J3ifiT q?qi5=arT?m^; i’ (ft. q^T. ^u) 
i q?T §Tfef^ FqqF^.cTT q?T Fq^^aqi^iqqfq’iiTq^^^'t 
^FqfqqrqaFqgt i ^F^ i ^F^i' 

«ftFq^q5^T^#sq ^rq: I sqt^qF^T^qTarqFq 

qrFvfq-^^rqrql’T Fq'FT^c^ i’ 

?^ifq I ^at^qf^sFq 

'3T?TTqT^^.^ JJSfrTq: fFsSJ FfF^: I 
q?!TT q«ir?^HPT: qq?: F^T^Icq*?^!: II 

^qi^q 3nq1f g qTfqq^( \ 

5^q q fq^q =q ^5T g=5q^ 11 

^q^qif^^qF qT^^jTqTqrT5T 3=5q^ 1 
=q Fqirq^ q =q q: I! 

Fa q^Rqq? ^fq q ^Ff,rf qqFq^ i 
^=53T’5cqTq^c^ fq q^q Fq^q^ ii' 






1 3Tlf^r^Trv?!TR:, ^ ^q^cfl# 

qiT^q ^r^T, qqrq I 
?f3;qq?cTf !MiTTfrT iT 

5% I strr^T^ %;iTqT i stct 

fqsqi qrq^ f%q?q'qRf|^c%?r ^STT, 

1 ?Fct fq^rrqq^q'F rq??fi[fT i srratqr =q 
^T^'iTT^qt qif^ rf2TrrT:~q;f?q^cq'Tc5. ^qsf^rsq^fcT g 
q^ qfqiq^—=5r qqqqr sqF^^TTqr fqf?TTcfT fq'jffqq, 

?? ^ arqcJTfe:?^^ I 

=^5?5T: sftqjR-sfqjRqfe-qq: 1 f^<T5TI?^'l f^qif:, gcftif 

fT-fiTKqq^ | crq^^f fq^aRf I ^T^TTf^—qf^qTf%q[ 

TTfir^qr^^rqmtq^q vrm^ rifj; ?xSTqf qr feqmi q%?T- 
^Tf'T ?Tq?cqq;r^Tc^ fqq^^q q?^ f^rqql fqq^q^ =q f^r^q^iri; 
r^^q^--?^qfq7:qJrq trq qqfqt fqfqqj^qq^: I fqq^Fq't qqqr- 
^TrqsPT^^q^jzfvT^, qqqiR^ irq^ift qfqcqq^Fq qqqiq- 
^Ryqqr|qfqcft q?q^qT«fqqq fqqq i q?qq q't^qqf^rq'- 

^fq'^fq q|q qqqTqrqr qqrTqqq^q^R^ qq^r l 

5r?5R?'pnj5qTqT5rfe5Jq?qTqrfffqq|: 

gqr^Rq: 5'qf:p;qq?q?tqtfe?ejqr i 
fq^^qrl^qqq'^q^’jr: qqfq^T: 

c 

fq:q%q iqfqFqfqq^Tqicqq'iFq ii 
f>9^qcqF^Tirrqrqc5Tpq 


‘fT^'T ITITTJT qf?:3Tr^rT; 1 

fq^TciTJfr fqq^eqRr q^i^sfq iq|^^T ii’ 

(3nqiTrr^?q^TT ^iH) 

?FcT I qsqr =qTfrF^R^q qq =q5^3rrqqqqr?lT sni^cfqt ffsqiTK^ =qr 
g<mqT?iT q^iqq qr ?T^t ^rnfq^riqqF^q i qq ?Tqq>qq^srq w 
q'li:, qqir^—Hq:T^?q[qq qT^rq-qr^q^q^rq qq 
qoTCirT^qTfqfcq I qgcq^q^cqqqcq^T^qt qiwfqq^ qj: 

qtcqiRqqsTq^qq^rqq-^T^qq^tqfq^mtq^qqq, qqq F^ q^^r- 
^qrqqrqlq q?qqT ^qq i qqiF^ q^fqqq^’qF^qFqjoir 
rfqqq^qiTqMq?qqqqT§;qKqpqvTTrqqtsfq qqTRTfqqrqrqqT^ts 
Fq-q^—qjqFq ^Tcqq^sqq^^rTq, qq^r^q^^^q q'q^ 
qrqq^cqq i qqtqiq 

‘5r5?TqqcqqrqTFqq^qTpzTr)qTW^^: 
qrqFq^Tq?rqqpeqqqqqffrqq i’ (q^- q- 
?fq 1 3f^ qq qiq^fisiTt srqrR-^qjRT^T q<iif qspq'qfcniqt fqqiq- 
Fqviqcqrqqt qrqyq^sFq qr^qifqq^Fqq qqTqqq^'tqfq^^qrqTr^- 
q^qq^q-qq q^qfq^jqqTqqq^lqqTqrfq^^qFq^qqqfqiFqq^- 
qqqFqqqFq I qq qq qrq^qqqqq^ 

‘qqqM qqqqq qq qTq:T?;^fqcqfq i’ (qr. q. 'Ri^) 

?Fq qrqqFqqi^ i qqr q ^qs^qj^q qpqq't^iFq- 

qqi^qqqRqrq Fqqqqqqqqq i q^ q fqqFqq^TT- 
FqFq q ^>q^qq?qq i q^q qq^T"?: -fq^r: i sftqyRfqqq^^f^ 
sqi’sqiq’t I q|q^ «ft^q^T?q 

‘qt'qq fqqq sqr^q Fq^^q =q5qq^^ i 
qqfqtq Fqqq'q q^r aqif^q^qy^r li' (qj- fq- 




6% 

I 




^TflTT JT5T ?tmfcTm 1 
5T^'^S2lTr^5fT^T5TTf^fTfTj'JTTf?fii: II 

f I 

(HT. f^. ^IKV3-H<i) 

I 3Tfq^lfq 

qqi ^Tfsqq it^.t qsi ^ \ 

ST%cft q^ qtsfq^TPcTq^ II 

ffa 1 3T^ trqT^q 5 ?q% ’qr^qVR^-sfq 

‘qTH^r^qTf^^cJt ^fTq: qRtqqV.qiq^; | (qt. fq. \\\)i) 
?f5T I l^fq ^ 8 fqa 

'q^TT ?qqiqq^5r?q:. l’ 

I q^qr^qt |qq—qife-q^^qT qq^iTiq;, 
3Tq;RT?itfq?qT5q ^nq: qii^qqqiqqTqt, ^s> 

srqqj^q qr^riqi, q qq qi— 5 W: qqc^ 1 q g sr^gt 

qrfq arq'tfqq'tqqqqq: 1 qqfiq'rqi ^^q^ic^qj^ 1 qq 
fq^q: \ q qqrfq ^fq \ ( q?i:) q'l q ^pm 1 

q^^qfqq^: h qq ^if, Wq^—qgrq^qfqqt^qq^fq I 

qfqx q'qqiR^T qtfqiqWI'^^r^^Tfqq^qT qqqqiq^-qr rqq^?q- 
qfqfqqr:, qgi^q qq^^Tq^'qifqqj^'qsqTqTwq: feqT^fq^’^qi: 1 

* >a 

qcf^ q'q: qq^|RqqTqqc^q;^q; 1 ^q?qTcqq: aiq^q^q^^^qi^: 

^pq q 3 TT^q:—qfifq q^fq^qrjq^^q qTTq^^qT^qj^r^qrfqft* 

qT%q ^qq^^qqjqgr^fq^qqigatqq: 1 qqr ^q ?qqiq qqrq^q 

qqrq'tfq ?qqr, f|T ?^sT?ir feqRqi qqfq:, qqi sit^^t:, q^q 
^^•'q qq qqr i^qi q q^fq qls^q q't^r^iftf r^ g^^qq^ot ffqq't 




?1cqT^ 1 q^cTc^ ^«ir F^oifFf gggf; | g;=5iia' I 

rl^q^^cft 1 ^ g q^^TTfiT^ rl?q iTc 5 ?T 1 

3To CT^ —STEFf^^fe^c^sfq q^£F^?!iq^?Tr ^: 

?q’'<f^—^T —f^R^T- 

3T5IT^: I ?—=ff^%?T r^5^^q5f%JT ^^T- 

fvicf: w4^\ fJcqr, \ ^ 

IJ cj pcR-Jcl r^ H -M fi^ 1 c<■^Aq I j^>!q5b^ 1 -q<+); TTj^ '=h<ircl I '^<=^■^4: 

qr^i'infe i h 

5p«iqf^ cfq—q^«irqq?i3^t l ?Tq:?q?TT^ i q;«T ? qs:—qg 

n^ q?qTt>^ ^ ^ 2 TT 1 q^q iftcg^T—q^q sftc^qfgr ^^q- 

I 

?itqg;qfqq fJc^T OTRqfe ^F^q: ii’ (^q. q^T. 

5 cqfFq 1 F^ 5f5a'\ ^qq:qt^qsi'qTqTqFq aiqi^q q^qn: l q 
?qT ^qqFq^^, qqtq^^^ 

‘qji^'tqqrqftF^ss qqqrq Ff^Fct^^ i' 

?^Tfq I qi^qq^ qqRfqqs^q^q 5 ^fqq striF^ qjqtF^ ^cqiFq- 
^fqit^qmF^cqt: l 3T^ qqlxfi qqqjq- 

q>R^ q? 5 ^* srqqq^; srqri^qif^^cq^q q?^qrq^’ I 

5 F^ F^ ci; I q 5 qq^qrFqiqq^Trqq^ Fqqi?? i 

‘fq> q sirFct q^f^qFqq^FsqJiFqq^iFq m 1 
q^qrqq s^rr: ^rqcqqifqq^qT^q: 1 
fqqqf^qq^fqtF^’qqFq Fq?q^ 11 ’ 













siiJST cigisq?aTTif¥r^cf ^c15T5?- 

^T^?T^f5T^r1?^r?Tf%2?n^^^cJTTr¥[H^d^ ^^5Tr?Tr ?=5t5iqT ^'T 
wnt I ^ ?tt^^- 

^^^ I ^?q?isT^'iT5ir^r^‘?rfg q^qfq 3T?fr?i'4 q^|q^ 

qf<5? ?5FT ^\^ 

3T?F^*lf|H?^cr?5qqtTTT^ 1 f^tJT^ffeqcT: ^%=5|5r ^^PcT^q^T I 
tGf??5s^?T^'qT«?i^q5Trii5rqcqr^qj^T^^ i a^siT^r- 

^ ST^of ^sfTq ?51 qq qq^vi^q I ^qq^qj- 

qqcqiq qqrqrqq qqifqqtFq^qq^jnq i arfqf^qqt^qT^Rqfqqrq 
^'n'^qrqTqfq ar^Tq^q^tq i qq | 5 ^q:qqt qq: 5 Rr 5 Tf^: i qq 5 
aq^ff qq:Tq?^q^Fq^rq?qiq q^q ?cqi| 'q^g:^cqTfq' 1 qq 5 
■•FTR (^qtq^;) qqqq o#r ^ - 5 %^ dc^Hi^- 

^qqiqTqqiq: q^Ftq^feq q^fqi^ ^q qqy 5 q: jq: qqiTq^Tfq 
?qq:^rq q 1 qnqq ‘qisqrrq^qcqqrTqTqHri?^ ^s^rFqfq:’ 5 % 
?fq?q: i qjqfe qqfq q^rq^rq, w^q^q i qq g ‘3Tqq:icqq;Fqqeq- 
^fF^v^q;’ f^5=5qq | ^^t^^ sqtq^zft q?[ ^q^fq 

q^qFq qqqq q^^q^F^rqq^fqq^q qTq^s?q:qqTgqzq: q^i^^r- 
5T^q: 31^ qqi^cqi^q Fq^r: qqiq^FqqqFq^siq^^T: q?^- 
q>T5fq^?^<irq q'tit^^qq q?iT q|tq^qTqf5qt5IT:, qi^F=gq- 
f^q^^fTqi qqqiafq^qq^?^^ arf^iqj^ar^Fqqq: qr 

arFq FqiT qq—Fq^qq qTqrq 5 rTqqq?q<inFq^^^qqq qqiqqq^F^- 
^q?qTq 1 ^F^Fqj^F^sqT^qr: %sfq Fq^T qq 1 ^qjqfq 

qqFqq^fcqiq: ^sFq Fq^T: I qqqJTFqqq'f^T^tFqqsar 
qf^ST.F^^qqiqri qq^lq^miFqFq^^F^^eqq: qrFqiq^^:, 

■^Tfsfq "q^ I -Bqq TTcf "q^q-qp^ 1 xr^ -pf^ Tpij^_ 













Tqt ■MH'H'^'lH, 37^ ^ rc|=bc-qfrrH4ii mfeH, ^ ^^T4t1%cT 

q^?5Jra '3T^’ ?^fcT aq=5SrfcT I 3T^T^r»Tfe^ 5Tr^T«lT^ ^ cr^ 
f%^qiftTT: I ^I^TT q iTf?^<iftsqT^R^q?qrH;g:T: eT^^q^?^T =^ 
^sfq 31%^ I Ci^fT f^?!T qi"?:- 

qirqqrt fefeq >Trq: i ^«Tr ^ fe^T: 

^rraqf?^ ^ ^ =q arftnqTF^qtqTc^ ^sfq ar^qq 1 qq- 

s?qT5q%5f fqqi sqrq^TFTqqfq fefe: i qm—■q<% fq’qf^qfq 
f^qrq^^i^ q^ f^fqc^ fqfs^iTq qqq qq i qq^rq 
qq fqqRqr I qq^qqqT ^jifqjfqqqqFfqqqqtqqqrqqf^qqT'iTT- 
qfqqFqqqq^[«'\ i 

qqq—3T^gq—aT^Tfq^q^^, 3 t<j# qjqTq^?, 

3^o^ =q vrrqiqi ^qi^jq qR, ^^qfq qq^ fqq^ i 

qqc^ fqqq>J^qt3fq—qcqifT 3i05T?^q 
mq: qqj'tq: q^q'tfq I 

qq^q fq^qqTqtqqicqT q'^^r’ijT qqj qq Fq^qq:, qqtqjq 

‘q^fq 5 q^T q q^iq^T I 

Fq^^q^cqqqr Fqq>5Tf%qq: sr^: il 

qyqrFqt q?q qiqr g qg^Fi^qjr i 
Fq?iT ^q^qqFqF^gq^qql %qr ii’ 

1 qfq g q'tqqrqi^q qqr ^it^q^Fq^ri^Fq^Fqq ^q^q qq?^ 
f ^qr ‘aiFftwi^ ^^qiFq ^qg^rq ari^qq I q^ qgsFi^^ 
FqqFqq^qpq-feqrqj^q Fqqq^tqifeqFq i qlFqqrqfq qr^q^ 
^^qqTqqTq%qqg^qir Fqqq qq ii ii 













JT5^^c^, cTr^^q^% 

c 

q: cir^cT: I 

^ ^ ^ ^r^cT: U n 

1^5^13, STqjjq'^fq—SISTIH^r^Jqftsfq ^qrf?T^T?fT- 
|5Tf??iT I JT^S^^irq ^fT^?TT^=q^T5^q5^qTroT qtqT^JTI^r^ITHT- 
5^T?f^°^rq, r^^«r55nfeqo^?jrr?25Tfq, ^]^ i 

qifsTc^—qTST%qmT^’T|tcft %% q: ff 

I 3T^T q^ 5fT^q ?I%^: I 

m q^ ‘^^^ i 

3Tzf —f^qq^c^rq i i 

3?q%<sq^?sqFrl? 'i^fqFci’ 1 q'^sjF^qia'TqqqT^q 

rqqfeu^ I jt: qjfaTf^frT— 

fl qqnq i q fq^qr^F; qtqt--‘qtqrrq^cqfq=5i5rfa’ sjci, 
qqt—sTTq^TqqTqf^qq^^iqT ^ Ct^t i ^q^i^qqr^'q ; 

^TFisr ^^o^: I cr?i|—q qsr fqfeqFqiift i q qq =5r 

?r%q: fqcqfqfq II II 

3T^?f qn^¥?T^«T 

qqffq: ^q^Tfq: qq^fT^fq^ I qqssiTq^q 

qfcqifqq ^Tq% ci?^q ^iqqrq'q 5TTqct ifq qi^qq i qqffq: 
^rq5fqf'<fq qj^'q q^qr I 




r(?TT 

f^mfq n ^o n 

3T^^ srraiTr^q z:t^TTiiT^mfe^’ rnq'm^^qi^iqic^al^JT^q ^ 

■?n%^ tq^TW-F^[?rH:. 

^'^fcsth I! \o 11 

3?1^rei5ft f^EIIH5ft 

sifcT n X? n 

fqfq:—5 Tt?t ^ tT q^:, 

'q^rfqcqt iriqcffssff fqfcspqt ffT^Wsq^':; 

o ^ c\ O o 

TqF-kTRT:^i ^ymTqF?f¥^''?y^: ii’ (^ r^) 

%f^ I ^ q2(i^rq ay^JT =!T^q h— 

^ r^qqffqqqi^'q qfcT arma i qar^f ^ sTFTr^^'qfq ■yrqdifct— 

^yqfyiRa^Ty^ II II 

epi^if^JT?nf??j': fc5t 
f^cft fq^gT^qfcIl?^: 

w 'RR n 


qyT^Tr^tf;!:Teivqif?^qfTTc^ qrqraT^ srr^c^, ??qyRPT 

l|, rcy^^J^^TTeTr—f^^TTcTf^T^TTTiqT f^r^'is^Tf^^f^if^^'T^, 













3{?^: q-;;; f^^TH’TcJT^ ^Tf^^T^T, cT^ cfT I 
^ ‘^fmfT' II II 

cT^^cTWffT 

3T^cr^;§rqf%^- 

II ^ ^ II 

sJT^f^ST^ |;?q^5rT?cl^fcT 

^%2r 5TR^ 1 3|t^;—SToq-^ SITf^iTf^ aTtJrfa’ 

5TT^^ 3^F^' 

Tj^ srrc^'tFr iR? ii 

^qrft 

^^cT: n qv II 

q^ q^, ^ q-qr | 

I ; 

Fq?q^^5F>T^izT F^rirq^Fg 

^T 

5Tf^qt ¥f^g¥r: J 


n n 

irg qt ^#1 
fr?q f?[^mf»75ft \ 

f^?5T^m|%^fiTcTI II U 

^ 3THr^ ?r c!T^^ f^f=^c^—?c^J 51 f^’a ^ f^^aicR^fafcr I 
ci^rai JT2fT ^5'?r 

f^er^cf, fg’afa? |5m?ci: i 3{?fr?TqT ftwW- 

^8iTT I JT«ft^q 

r?i^h?ten ^ f5r^?T:^T^?TFTJTt ii (?q. ^\. R\'3) 

13T;qT aifq ^^TT 5 3^cit 

^t^fcT I ?rqf^T^_|555rT?^sfq 3?Tf^qqTcT 1 

^Tf^ 3?4ijt-q qf^fq^sfq 35Icq^qf^qtjtsq?cTiRT'< 

qfkqT'q^q ^fq, i:rqiJK^feqfTt^ ^5Tq;i5yq\q?f^qqiqm 

I q^ q^ srfq^t^rqq qsf^T5Rftsrq srfq^ 
’q^Fq I qq^ q^qJtq qt«TT, qq qq qqn^—qqq qFqq^srfqgt 
^\ qtFqqt qi FqqqTqrTiqqqtfqqTqiqlqqi^pqiqiT’iTTf^- 

^^?iTST?5rq5^*’aTq^^7q^|[^q;Tcqq!Fq'iTfqqTqT^¥qr5q|'q 

5Fq II qq-q^ ii 

qqqi^Tqqq^T^qjqF^cqTil^q q'^T qqFq qqi sm^qq^. 
^qt ^qar Fq'qfqq, q^qi 5 %i qqssqq i ^^q^ ^wm- 
^T?q<| 


<TTFft^T 




f^^qfq ^ mi«f e^TT^T^ II 

I cTc^?TiT?jftqmT ? ff^ifq ar^fq ^rrsm^- 

I ?TT g ? ^eqrqJT^ fqR^jq^sqr?^^- 

^ ^ i 

f^T %?lf 

N 

n^vau 

5 f55lt iRf 
55nfimf«T qt3f% I 

N 

3^T 

H5I3? f^^^STT'cT^ M^dU 

fe: I 

os 

a>iiTc^ 

^ ^x u ^ ^ (I 

5*‘^’^nfr»x+e^»n ( 

fX^ 


CR^T^JTJTT^^ I 

N 

^TWcTr^g^FT^’Jlf 

U^?U 

C\ N ' 

q|5IT?ff 

cT^: §iTf?^3^?§ 

iT5TT5T^m u^^ii 

3TTcHT5T ^ I 

N 

qsf ^3T^m?5mcT- 

^rf^^scqcf Mst: 

^TiRT?Ttf%^^qiPir 1 ^?gcT: 

qSTcqq:o^tiTTr??iTT'JiT-rr?T^%5Tr?TTf^Rr^^rt^^^Tq%in^qr- 
'»^^—JT^IT ^-^T: 

*X f^TTJTJj^K^, ^ ^^qq’q^iT, ^ ar^^f^rq, ^ qiq^q- 

5%, q%?7^qqfq^Tmcqq^^ q^Hi^r^qj^r: qai^qi^T—ff^ 
qa^^rffT: i artq qTfe^qifqq-qr'qTqgq^^n: i q^q?* 

fq=E^ft5rqcftqic^ qqicqqr qTRT: I 5q^fq ^ETfgr^qfcmffqq^TTc^ 
qqqrq?TT i f^miqr—qq^qq^q?cT- 









qqffq-qnTeR I 

^q^tqfq qc^qr ^rqfFir qqqT^fq qr^q^ fq^uirf^ i 
Hq^qfcqq^^f^’qq^, f^^tmpTT ^mi qq fer: i 
^T^qj I cTqrfq qcT^q qj^qq—STT^^rrericqJT- 

^cqqiq I q^n ctt^t qrcTSTfq5q#cT: i ^ ^rq^r^if? 

f?qiTq I rlf e5I5q q^^qqi?^, ^5?q ff 5T5q: I I 

t^f: cTsiqTcqq^^qTq—? c5€ ^i^t: i qqj q fq^qiqrq— 
ar^qicqfq q^qicqfq ^'i^qTcqqi?Tq5>qeT^^qjst^- 

^Tff^:—q^q^qi'qqqRTcrq^rq l qqi|: «ft^ftqT- 

q^qqiqT; 

‘sT^qiqqqTfqs: ^qRqqRqfqqRq i 

feq: q^Tt^ q^qr qq: ^q^qr ii’ (%• ^i?) 

sfq 1 qq^rq qqfqqfq'qR qrqfqcqqqTqFqfq: i qtqqq qq^rq 
f^qsq^q—qfqqffqqcqrq qqqj'tqqiqiw, 5^q ^qi^y^rq, 
q 

‘q^!^qi5?:?qfrqqq ^ I 

q^q^qiFcqqj F^^ qq «tq ii’ (qi. Fq. 

?c^qqFq FqqFa^q i Fq’RicqFq qr% qiFq-Fq^qTqTqFq^TqjFq 
q!5^ qiqq^q ^qrq-’qrq aF^cz^qy^^tr^ ^qrqf^^'q qj^qqiq^qq i 
a^qq^q—a?tq Fq^?5^qcqTq ^c^qj^rq i qfg:—ariF?- 
^T^aaiqicrqqq |qqq l syq qq ariqqqFq qq qqq—3TTqTTI- 
^q>: I qqtqjq 

‘qqq^q^qqTqrrq qqqqiFq qy^qFq i 

■f 4)M^Tt?lcqi ’ll ( q. Tyt. ^ |^ o ) 

fcqiFq I 








1 ^fe^Tssiftqtftntsfq i q^qi sr^ 51®?^^%- 
q^qfqjfqT^ I ^T^cTrt: 3 t^^?t ?T?qrT?iqTrq^zir I 

=q qTqj'iTTqfq q^r ^rq^qiq; '^vn —^rqfcqt^TiT^^ 1 ^ifqt 
%q^qTfqtq:fef5ns<q^q?q?TqTr5TqTfqqqTg^: srqqqqT^^^qi- 
srqqf^q f^nff^^rq I m qq fqf^TST^cqT^qrfqfmqqq 
qtqTJ^—qipq fqqq^T^ I 3Tr5^^qTqr^q^Tq?Pq^Tqq^^ qjq- 
qrd55 ? —qs^qrqqtq^iq: i qf^ sriq^fi; fesTq^^rfq- 

fcrrq^rq, qqr^T^^q fq^fqqqs^TrqTf^qq^'qqr^qqT^^, 
3 T^fq 5 tfqqT 5 ^^q% arqFqfiq qq i qq qq qrq: 

TTFETjcqTfq fqoff^q, qqT5I®q: q^Tq, q^qi q qq^q»T I q'^^ 
^qq^qqr ^'q^q, q^q ? \. vr^cqr—qTqTc^^qiqq^^Tq'^qicqqT, 

R. qqcqr—^q q^Hq ^qqq5Tq:fq»TT*tq i qqqt ?qq ^q^, q 
q'^ ?qq?qFq?qqqTq^qTq qq—arq^T^qiq^’qq^Tq i q qstfqfrq 
5iq ^fq fq^^sq, q^qj’ sqtqcqFqqTqTq 

‘?=qTq-’qT^qiqT^qTq ^qiqj^^qrqsqTcqq: i 
qqft^rrfqqqr^q^qqfq siiq^T^^q II’ (q. qiT. 

?fq I ^q^qr q g;q^q qt q^q —qqfeqr?^- 

^qqrq^qfqqrqqqTq^qTq \ —iTTqtqqqs^^qqF, ^— 
q^qifq q qq^qfgq^^ i sTTcqrq fq^q^q—sn^q^q fq%?i^qr- 
qiqrq i qq q sric^Tq^q fqijq^q fq^^^qq —sr^q^- 

qqT^qy^q i arq qqiqqrqi —qqq^qqqc^^qiqf^q^: ^fq 

qq^q i 

srr—qqq qqr qq ^?qTq ‘qTTqifqq^^sftrq- 









T^T^r^Tfil 


^3r?f q^’^^^ef^f^^TZTT: {X) 

(R) ^^TT ^ cIT^IcPJTPFZF'liTJT^'T^T^W^ (^) ^ qf^fiT^I- 

cqt^TcR^q^^cqf^qr qf^^ifF^^ETFff^r^^i^cqTcqq^r—sTRfr^q— 
?^TqT5qT?qq;T^ ?T?rTi i 

srrT^qqq—^T^^eqRRTqr 

sTFx^qqT^, %^^T^f^'t'q^vrqq?;5rqcq^r'qq^3egfeTqT#?:^* 
’Timife, ^iqfr^5^^^qiT|T^%^T3qqT5qq^T^ ^q^TT^—ST?^- 
qf^Tc^ I arq^rq arfr^q^jq fqfq^^rrqq^qtsfq, qi?q: 'jqqr qjf^c^— 
^ qRqq^ i 

‘^q^q^qqf^qrq q?qtsq qr^qTtqq: i 
qt^q^ qjq^ fqqTqmcqg^^: ||’ 

3iq ^^ qqifqq qf^qT^rifef^qf ^rqq?^- 

qt^Tq% ^qfqtfq i q|q;^ ‘^TRFrTcqgfr^g’ 5% ^ qqtqq^^q 
q?%q f^5—fqq^^ qrqqt^feqr^qcqrc^ q?q qigfiTcqrc^ i 
j^tiTRfqqil^ q?f^T^Fq ?rq^Tfcqqfqqrq%q, ariqfb^^. 
cqTf^qi^<q fq^fqqi^ l I^qqi?^ 

q fq^f^qq; qic^qqqr^, qrcqf^q; qTcqqrsjir^qrFTc^q q|qy^q- 
qj^ ?fq fqqfqqrq^rq ii n 

FqsJrqqqrqrqr qqfq ? ?cqqq^fq 

^3f STr?T5^rcT II^VU 
5^351^5^, 53j5rrW(T: 

W5rt?:?q«^rfts: RT3R^?rr?f.i;w^,5t^ftfrawict5rei?^t 

sft^fjTE IJT 5Rfe, f3I5«t^ tr^rqilT^fft ^ 5^!,;, 












' 5 FqTiiq’ I (R) ^qT?T^ 5 E?sr?i 5 srf^g^- 

?T^RTRfqqtsfq ^q^^rpTT^r^FI ^ITHf^^ni'^- 

qq^^q r?l«qf^—^RcT?qTTi^qm? 3 [ 

qRv^ I m gT^qf^qR^jqq ^q 
^T ?T 1 q^ qiqil: fq^fq 1 3 Tq 5 f^qqifq qfqq 
^qq^q qqnrq^: ii^vii 

(W^yq:) 

‘qqpcy 7 :%^ qif^ qg qqq qy^I^ 1 
ff yiT ^qq f?q q^q qqy: il 

^yqyft qqqr qyfq ^q qqsyfqqyq qq i 
qqqq^ ^qq?^q qqTt=5q fsqf^ || 

qqtqqq^Tq?q^T>jy:q^qFq^ i 

?q?qqTqgqT?frq fqq ^fe^s'^qq ii 

KqTq?5q^?StfqiT;ir?^qfqT qqf f^fq^ « 

fqjsiTf^rq q^qif qts^^qq 5 qq ii 
q^qj^q, qqq^^q, tqj^qqy q^y^ 1 
q^fq ^qqyqtqr: fqqrfqq^qTq^: 11 

f^^ 5 f fq?q?q: ?q^q qi^lfe^ I 
fq^f qq^q qyf^q qi fqqy qfqq qq:T^ 11 

IqgsqfeqpqTq^TiqT^qfq qqq: » 

3i5r^^q q^yq: ^qy^q qq^feqr 11 

qjq^qqqyq q fqqqqfqq%: i 

q^ q^qj qyqq^ fqq^qyq^ u’ 









^00 




5 Tr<tT ^q?^i i 

5 Tm?TRi ii 

^qrami: ^rfTTf^^cTTJTT I 

5 f^jqqtf'q 5 n^T^ II 

^riqi =qTfq irpn^rr qf^q;»5 1 

qfq^qr ^ ii 

f^qq q ^qt qtq q -Ct^fq T 

^T’qq qJTarsq^ q^ qtf^ srqq qqr^ q^q q^R 
q^qqjq^ q^qi qr^ ^qq qsf ? f q q | n 

qqq|q^R¥q fq'iffq—qq qTqqi?iqqq;T5T: I 

qq^Tqqjqirq qqqq^^q^q fqq^qqiqr^qfqqf^qiggqqfq 
qqtqiqq^^qqTTiqTTm q^ i fqfea'^^'T 5 q'rqt qqisq: 1 
^Tqf^T^qqiqi^qfq ^gqtqfqfe^ qUq^qiqfqfefqqc^^^cIsfq 
qiT^^sqq^qi^qrqqcqqfqq^-qT^, q|q 5 F 5 rq?g> 

‘qqriqi^jqqjqMgqTqrqrsqaqqqqi’ (vs i<^) 

?fq 1 qqifq qjq^^^q^q qif?q jq^^qi qiifqc^—^gfq^tcer- 
q^q^rq qqrfcqqq^qrq^iqqiq^rq q^qiqqcqTc^ 1 sflqyqqjr- 

^ 5 iTqT qfqqRfiqTqtsqTqe^q, q^qqyqcqic^ II 

q qtqqiq fq^qfq^ q^q^qtsqq^fq 

f^q>?Tffrf^?retiqTr \ 

I^T^afqrf ^^T^^ 

fTtm?! ^?rwj?qcT II II 




F?cTc^t= 5=^ F^^ea; 'rF'^^'if^ ma' i%s!ftaT — 

H^t=^F^^r?rqqfq=aF?:^q^^T% qj?? 

«qT^a I Fqr =^ 3 t?zt ^rraqi^—‘?ftqi5i’ ^^^ 

srF^a: F^^q—qF^5'jf^-??qRq f ^qifqqJTFq^F^T- 

qj^qr 5qfqg:T?5TTRTq55qif?q?«TTqTcT sTTfcrma^^q^f:, 
qt€ivrRrqqr^=^Tqq5T^^itiTqjTq5=q3:=q52q5Tqfscr:, jaRi^qqa- 
F^iFjtRTqaTqRqRfqsF^q^^i^qtqqq^^TT^FqqfqqgqTqTq^f?:^ - 
=q-5qT:, jq: g;qq;^'tqqqqTq=5qjqqjrTqTqFq'qR^ ftqT5=q^atq> 
cqqqqr«qqj^qr?i5q^a^^sfmq fq?Fqfq i 

aq^-q^F^q q^T^qrq qtq^rrqJT^TfqfqFqqF^q qjqiqTqqj^r'q 
^qQs^qfqF^T^ I qrfeqjR^rqjq'qqa; q^qq^^^qq^q^^^qqqrFqs* 
qqmT^Fqq?r'iTqsq5?qf?qJ3q?ig; gqq^q Fqqfrqqq^:q|qq^qq- 
Fq^iqrFqqT^iqTFcqq^rqFqqqtqgqqi^JTqTqqT^ 3TM-q^Ffq ff^qr 
3q?Tqn'i-tiiAdct^41'Jiqi(^chi^)?qqT afrqnrqiqTRT^ Ti%q 
^Fqjqsq^qqF^qq, Fqqq?cqq^, Fqqjqat q5:qq^TqT Fqsfrqr 
qfqeq FqFq^FpJfq q?qq;^5 qt^5f, qqtsFq q=50Fq qc^— 
'qqq^'t qjq^T' l qtq^ ^sqqqqjj^ sqqqq^f ^q^q# 

q%q Fqqrqvq^dfq^^q^q^q: I qqiFf—qqqi 

qqq^qT qqgRqq^qqTqF^^^iT qvqFqqqqqqqT qq^ ^Fq etq> 
q|T^qj:, q?q qqqqrqrqqFqq: qf^^qfiqRqqfs^t 
q^q^qvq^qFq fq?q^qrqq'qqFgq5T?:Tqqq^r^qiF^q;qr jq: jq- 
TTqqqq'VFq qq qqT5q% I q qq qq qqq'tFqq't ^qqqq:, qqrq- 
qrqr Fq^ i 

3r?q g fc^Tqig s^q^ri^q qari^: q^^q^q:, qq g;q- 
’i^qqq'tsT^q, qFf^qgFsqyq FqssFq srFqqi^qqT’eqFqqq^q- 














■'I^, Ircra ■^SJ ^7^; 37?4'(|feqT3i ^ rl^nft 
I TTcT Ml^Vl^ci’Jlrm MiNVIc^^-JId^JTTT 1 
‘ 37I^Tl<r^'dJ7’—^^^W^Hc^^:|ld I ItcfRTlf^ 3T^ 

■RTFT^'q M?cTcq ^RnT^Tcq^. ^ItWFR^ 

«ira^ ^:^T?iraTVi7m ffi 

5^^ ^r^^^ I 31^ =^r^rZ7PT?cf sqi^T^ 

?fcT 

\ II II 

nTf^ 

^imi- 

^Tf^T3^5Tfr5J|c;Tq|^ \ 

>a s 

ST^cST^f^THT^fcT 

7f \\ U 

^=5gf^^=5'5Ts?q7;Tc?8?^f^^q^^*\?itir?n:f^?{tcHT|:, 5 ^: 3 ?!: 

^fc^STf^fe^qTfqTTTTc^ aicfflfe I ^|fTT q^^T- 

^fcT II II 

^rq^qc^tq^f^q^ 1 qjf?^ 5i?7?;?q^qq^^ fq^iif^^^qr- 

qw 

•H ^ 

qcf?wn?Tcl: fHfe: 

II ^V9II 



























FF^fTOTt ^Tr^^-cTftJTroTr ^ 

^fjthV ^5FT ^?Fir5^ JT^TTFf^—e^Tf: f?if%^msT5?ft^^q- 

sTRvir jrr^g’f^?T-cn'TP<^'iT^0^qf8^f^Fir?T?f 
zi^F^:, ^fcT snEFsJTT^if^Frfi^^ i ‘q^q^rr- 

jf^irqR^r^rJiFTfiFt i ff ?{% 

r^T^Fi il 

II HqTBfHef q^rqtftrqqfqq^iqiT ii 

%r^ 5rq?r5i?rcfts'^'^!Tf^- 

!iqTi?Fq|^^q^F^5rqg^aF: | 
5q«?Tf^^q:T^?qfqFTi5fii??? 
q^i<Frtr^qrr=5W5jqiT?r5qFrFir ^r?!? ii ? li 

o o 

qrTiq^feF^ 

?jt^r5T^ JT^Fr^iff^aT^ ^r=^: i 
vrif^ 

FTid" gf^FTt ^ q^TSig^ir: li R il 

ariT^q ^r^TJTf^qirqFTrrJTfTt 

qq7Fq?:r^^ qqj^f^ ?rFirq>i 
fFT^^q^t f^qqfcTsr 
^fqrf^ 11 ^ 11 

^fiFTF^FT cFig^f: qig^TSTfFfT %5r: I 

cT^q siF^rfeq^^qT^f 

li v 11 









'TTT^'tr^r^T 


qq^- 

qf^q^q^ ^q^tqjqj^diiqq^ 5nqTf^si%: i 
5 q|qscqfeq^Tf^qT q^^TT q?qq qq^q^ 

q1fgq)Fqq:^r^ q^qi qqt ii ^ n 

q^qqicq’qqt fqqifqq^qcqqr^fq: ^q^T- 

fqTqTqfqf^fq?q%q;q:rqq: qj'nffqqTq^ fs^r: i 
q't qie^sQTq q^tq^sfq fqqqTqf^ fq^iq ftqTi- 
^qiqi^q^ fqq^fqg^ qqi^Fq^^yqt^^ u ^ i) 

^RTT f 5 Tq 5 Tiqq^ 5 f%^: 

qc^r q^Rqfq i 

q: ^i?qqfqqt%^ q^^TR^piq: 

N 3 

qi^J ^i f^qqg ^q^gqrq II V 9 II 

feq^TfqqjTfqq;: qqqrqqqqj'qrqc^ i 
TTq^qifqqrq^q qrrqqt^q^nqrq?*. \\ 6 \\ 

C\ 

trqf^qqf^qqjqiiTrq^lg^q qyqqT I 

qrqqq^fq q?^ qq?q f^qr^q^ li <?, ii 

sTfqqurqrqqcqifqqTq: 

o 

qTfq^caiqqq^qT i 
5 qtq 5 qtq:i 5 q?S=q 5 Tqqi^- 

c\ 

fq:q^qT^: qTfqqtqT^qqTqr^ ii ?o u 

q?qT?qqT^ q^fq q^qr^ q^T^q^qi^^ qfq^ 5 q 5 f?qT i 
qqRfm?qqq:T§;^«qt q: f!iiWq^ 5 =fq^TFqqTq: ii U n 









^?iTTrg%r^^?rJT?a'i?T«f^ rm- 
qTCcTTlfrqtsrqqgqc^q^TpqtTTq: 

o 

qr^^rirf^qqi^i^TqfiT? ii H ii 

^ q'qiJTt ^v. 

%SczTf^ qf^fq^g^ q =q q^f: qR I 

q?cq5=q; qFqq^f^rr^qqqt^fgRqrgf^qt 

^^q^tsfq ^ q^fag^q ^iqj^fqfg- q^q nq ii ?^ || 

?qTcqrq afq^qqcq^qqr ^ qrqqr 

o 

qr?qcqTcqq^qsfqT^ q^q: i 

fq’H^qnFq fqfq^^ f^q^f^qt ^ q^q% jq: 

qiqv^qqfqg qtq fqf^q't ij^q? q'qmRT: li ?v ii 

^irq?^ ^qqf-q qq 

^qicqt^cq qqiF^iqTqq?!^ q^qr fs q^q^* • 
qg^^q ^^qi^qr^fqq^ qrqr^qrqpq^ 

qcqrqrqfqqrqqTq qFsq qrqFq^r^ qqr ii l'\ ii 

c\ 

q|Fq^Fq qts^q ^Fqq?qrqtq^5r^q-t: I 
q^qfqFq q’q^qqfq ^qr 7:qqr q q^q^ II n 

q^fT^T: qq5TqtS^’qfrqTqqq;j|^fqq: I 
5q|qT'^q: 5fqq?FqqFq Fq^q;qi?qr% II II 

qqrqFqjf^sftqFqFqqiFqfq^ ^qq sfqgFqq i 
jqlqtqTq^qqq fqq^q qqr Fqq^fqq^ ii ii 



'TU^'tfsfT^T 


^sjfts^qcTT^r^FEsir^^^i^q^frR^^s^gm: i 

sit^ jra^T ffg srqq^iTg 5 t?tii ii ii 

szTi’EqTrg^ifqf’cqTfeq^ 

^rfq^^^qrq^^fiTg ^rtr %fT ^- 

II Ro II 

^rt^^fq^Rqr ^'tr^r^^T Fq^f^eir i 


n wht ii 






INDEX OF HALF-VERSES OF PARATRI^IKA* 


ua 

<ja 

^oa 

t:;a 

^<ia 

nb 

<\<\h 

<\^b 

ea 

^=;a 

^\3b 

^a 

<}ob 

^V9a 

^^a 

vb 

^^a 

^va 


qr^ 






?nT^T 


?l^ STId^lW'JT 

?T^5Tr d'cShHI'iSMT 
^rf^pgr^ f^tjFT^ 


^TFTH^ fTRTS 
?rnRq' ^riFT 
?rr?FdTf|cf 
^ft^r: ?nnwraT 


tT^Tqrw: ftrfe: 
b[^F ’T^nrif 



q;^ wqj^rrqrf^- 
^rspriri^icr— 

qr«nnlTT itj^vrrfd' 
'pr5rrfbT*Trfqcr: 



: ?!TW 


q^s ^rsuT 
\9^ 

V3V9 

eo 

^o 

V9V9 

^*1 

V9^ 

V3V9 

o o 

5.Y 

<Joq 

«1oq 

5.!< 

e-t; 


*I thank Dr. (Miss) Sushama Pandey for preparing the Indexes 
(Editor), 



^04 

'w^n^ichi 



TR 

qx3 qTiqr 

va 

^'rf^+isiT 





eb 

VT? 

'aK 

^ oa 


5.^ 

^Ya 

ftRTS^; 

5.R 


cRf: g^'oT^CT?^ 

5.K 

^ ob 

cT5 efe- q-ij^'lc 


RKb 

cRTI 




5.R 

Kh 



vab 

5Trfe f^’wr^ 


^c;b 

^TRT^ JTT ?rwr 

5.y 

^C 



'Joa 

^cfnf g^TTfw 

va'c; 


Rrar; q^ 

va'va 

R’kh 

grerr ^^^rf^rcrr 

5.^ 

^vab 

^qrq" ir^ fspit ^sir 

5.V 

^5.b 

y^'TTfe7^Rq-# 

£V 


?;''^^cM<iir wqr 

€.K 

^a 

cTr^rfR 




^va 

'iva 

5fiTRr^^?T 

va'^ 


’IftT FrRq q-^ 

•a^ 

^vaa 

qfsq q-q# ^ 

S,Y 

'ivaa 

qrJTt %% 

<^\a 


TTf^Trqf 


'}=;a 


\ 3 ^ 

^!<a 

J=qTiT£r#3r^: 

S.^ 


5rR!TFq7Tq-q^ ^RTt- 

<1 o ^ 

<ib 

^ f^?frqTTT#<ir 


vaa 



'jsa 


vava 


















^d)4ilc^li9bHru|=bl 

^0^ 


q’]-^ 

cn^ 

c 

^ ob 


5.<1 

^S.a 

fw<ir ?twrfw^ 

5.V 


ftr^r f^?^i^«i»-ctKd. 

5.<1 




<1^a 


\3^ 


^ ^■n7)% cT^r 



art’ll f^’4?f: ^q'-o©— 

5:^ 




c;b 



Ub 

H ftrfeHF'VTtf^ciT 

S.O 

'jXb 

^Trsn?mc5iiTr^^sr- 

V9' 

^'ia 

?Tfe 

?.!( 

nb 

fcq-^T?^w sirrtq; 

0 0 

^b 


:^o 

'i^a 

fqJT 












INDEX OF QUOTATIONS 

CN 




?T^TT: f^T^r ?cT^— 

7rH?ri%)- 

?raipT ipT f^fef 
?rT^; 

WW'iX 

.itMif^cA' 


'?t’ #if 5r5 

vD 

?FJTSWTrf^^: 

cs 

?TRiRT^^ir^ 

^ fcH ^ 

o 

iii^yiR+Afi'SirFcf 

^TR^Ter: ^ 

=M’iq£rRt ^ 5m>rr- 

>0 

?nwrR: ^rrw^iw?i% 


?c<!Hd^^id'=hN^ 





id^ . . 


f%o ^o 


'Tfo 

f^WTWlT^ 

ftr0^0 TIR o 

^0^0 <^lc; 
^[oq-o 

ftto^o qiq 

^of^o ’^\^o 

^oqrro 

Tffof^O ^\^^ 
5roq-o%o 
^oqryo ^|V9 
TfTof^o ^\%^^ 


c 

YV 

To 

'll 

Yo 

R'i 

^S. 

YT 
vs 5. 
vy 

n 

V3 

KY 

Y^ 

u 

Y^ 

TY 








































vdM'l^l^i: ?nTFrf%— 




nrtT«i 
tr^rr snTpiR 

tr^^ferr# 



?fr=JTwnTR^r?rR?r 

'S 

.. .^■<u|’|5=ri^ %%TnT 
'M^'1 ^n^i^cr ^wnr 
^n^TtwqiTf^05% 


vT ^i«if»xt 
fFTc^r 

o 



^sjrfrr^jT^r 


^>rHt ^TRinjfir- 
5n»T ftiilT ^ ^<rfMt 
^r: 

dc%4Plf PdillP^- 
... dr^RcSI^fd': f5T«r: 


q^: STFIT- 

.. qT^rnrcT: 


d I * 

d'^rJmPd^ki %cr 
5FJT ^cT- 

dwft- 

c 


f^<iMT<«, ^o^of^of^o, III, vsq, 


oTToTTo 
FT o^TTo ^le. 

ftro^o V3i^ 


^ o o 
^V9 

^V9 


TTTof^o 
ftro^o 
FToqrro 
^o?To viv^ 

d i ^d^<a ^T, mof^o^ro’fo <i% 


^R 

uva 

^ O O 


^O e;|^<l 
^o^TT® ^1'^ 

ftr®^® VR'^ 

foSTo <ll!(R® 

?T® m’SJT ‘^l'^l'>^^ 


5r®qn‘® 

Trr®f^® ^1^0 

ftro^o ‘in\9 

^n®^® qR^. R"^ 

ftro^o 


ftro^o vaR 


^®qTr® TR 
^oqrr® ^1*1® 


^,*1^ 

^va,t;^ 

ne 

%R 

5. 

St'S 

vq 
qY 
<1 o o 

%K 
^*1, R'^ 


m®!^® 

ftro5® vaRc 


lY 



snriTSTif ^ 
f^^n^T^qr sfr?^: 
^^tRwsqt^ qrt qrqr— 
5 'TTr ^ 

f ;#sfcr 5rf^fn%q- 
Smuillqq WRR 
^<^n-cr q-sfr: qr^R 
^ ^f%qT ^ 
n ^ tTT ^ 

^ ?;-qrf%^-1%qr Rf% 

f^'^iruiii u^|i,|^^q-q- 
f^'frqqTR’: 

^rHcf^r^rTr 

'Ts^i^Sl^cqcRqT- 

'TSRf^q-q^^ 

qXoqqf^lfif cf^ 

' %qnT 

'TTrqRT^r^rjRrTr 

'T'<Rq <.^ftrrzr— 
qig 

Tfqxq vq -oto u ficqvq-^ 
‘fVSi^qq'f li'^rEflTj 


^r%if ?rm 

JT^iywFrrvrTRq- 


W3nf^ 




o o 3 1 ^ c; 

V3^ 

TfoVTTo <1^|3<^=|Yo 


^ncP^RR 

Z 

^of%o 




B 1 ^ 

Vva 

i%o^o ^15^ 



^ O O 


Yo 




SCT 



?rfVFi'qrr|C^ 

O 





!( 



i%o^o ^o 


^Fof^o V| cj 

y;> 



^Fo^fo V\3 

V9<1 

^oCfo ;^|;^ 






Rof%o ^ 1 

!(,V3 

^0^0 ^|<)Y 

V3<^ 


R^ 


e^i 


^\3 



'Jo Os; 





^*1 

















^foSTof^o 'O'D 



^of^o 'v3 


^JT^Spr ?T 


Vo 

arRff^irf^ 

irro^o Y\<\'i 

V^ 


TTfot^o 

Ko 

#3rTRnw^Ji^^r? 

> -N 

^TTof^o ^IV-'I'i 

Ko 

5I^lfeWM'T4^ 

TH'of^o ^I'^o 

KiC 

W^r: 

^fFTR?? (f^ffa') 

<1^3 


o 

\3h 

^i-HHi+y.yirvTrt 

ftlo^o VSIVS 


^ferr 5 ^ 

irrof^o ?i:(c: 


M 0+i^-iPin i'^ lifV 



’TJT'ar^pTFTR 


ev 

JR^Scq^jT^ f^ifST^cf 

^^0^0 q|i(:; 



^TTof^o TR'i 



qrof^o <)iv<) 



^oifto <|Y|3 

<)V3 

^■WRftr^sl^ 

irrof^o 




^5. 

mzftqfT JT^nrraT 


^V 


f4^) 


’Tnfisf ^Tsr^arsi: 

o 


Vo 


iTfoi^o <i=:n, ? 


o 

ftro^o <ii<j5. 


‘ * '^Rr:^|- • • 

q-o^rro 


irar f^rw 1%^ ^nrfer srf^w’Rr 

!(\3 


FTo^o 

?o,H 

^y<iir^NH'4'-# 

^0^0 

VS. 

?T^^T#rd4 !jT^r 

FTofTo \\<\ 

e;\3 


ITToj^o 

X<\ 


FTo^o 

n 


?rf*Fr^JT'^ 


?r4iT4t 

ifomo TRI^nt: 



J 

























w^ir^ichi 




2T: ?r#' • • 

^ 'W ^cf 

■?;^Tr?rTr%^TnT 

T^ft%?rFrFqTrr 

iTSq- g 

^TRTTrnfBrfq^cfrsftr 

wrwHiinfrfq-^sfq- 

f%5)H^>=(<^RC^'t 

pc^ F^'csf ^ 

?f^fV?rr— 

Rrf+R^- 

q<|-Dmc1 


iTo^fTTo 

Ro^o t^T^i^ticic: 
^75 o 7 ; I c| I ^ 


5'^'T^ 
IRo^o \3o 
f^olTo Ec; 
^o1%o 

^ft%?TrRn: 
^rer^TRTT 
^r ofRo 

o 

^of^o ^|^C| 


Re. 

RK 

C)V3 

V3 5. 
=7^ 

V'l 


?r^jftSFT ^shTcIk^ ^°^°1%o <[R 

vi®'^<in^id*{c?Rir f^ovfo <^vs 

W5^5RIRPTT_ ^ 0^0 <IK. 

^^ 0^0 ^|<jv9 =;«. 

f^$''Trfq- ci^r ^rr^ 

^■^fw^i^TSFrhrrfrr ^°fko 

H^'Hccf R =70 

^ d’JTT ^ ^°^To :^l<^ 

...?I%?Rq-; ' ^roiRo ^ 1 :^^ V3R 

?r#wr^rsRF#nRT ^°^o V3£, e.^ 

^sqR^RTiT^fq-fFir ^''“l^o vaR 

=^i-fq- q-RRt 

WWPt *1 ° ° 


(^rnrmfsRTR T^nR) 



















fijTo^o <11^ 








?f^ra^rf?'T: JnfdM'f^^^: 


H 

Tfw^ ^ 


'\R 

^l^cWriTRIcf 


T'l 


%IN'I«J!(IF^ 


?rr fd^'i'urr irf rf^ 



^r ^s-TT 

|%o^o ^i:^V9 


few O^IRT 

^TTof^o Y|^!( 

v^, -K 

^rnTRTRWif oqTRf 

qTof%o V|;>1( 


maRTPR^ STRT- 

lITof^o YI^Y 


gt 5 :# f^ifrl ^ 

i%o?o i3i'|o:( 

<\Y 

5l^4<dll^R- 

fin'o^o \9 


P;5TiTfrftd%^- 

ftro^o <)|Y 


• •. Hfrq; JfTifd+ifir^Trd; 


<\\$ 

FpwnRT^i 

t C c 



^'=td''d: Tfryiffsir 




fqo^o 

\3<\ 

^RfRJHiRd'irrciTr^r 

5loJfr]o HIKII' 

i'S 

qMld 



fft’^R^ftTrTOTO%qT’T 



If; fF<iTdt ’Tf?5T: 

rd+dUicrR^ 


|f? JIJTfT JTRJT 

fftTTRR (l%fi%) 

R’i 


1 
























JAIDEVA Singh (1893-1986) was a 
great scholar in musicology, 
philosophy and Sanskrit. A former 
principal of Y.D. College, 
Lakhimpurkheri, he also acted as 
a Chairman of U.P. Sangit Natak 
Academi. He was awarded Padma 
Bhushan by the Government of India 
in 1974. His other works include: 
Siva-Sutras, Spanda-Kdrikd, 
Pratyabhijndhrdayam, Vijfidnabhairava. 


SwAMi Lakshmanjee, Saivacarya was 
the greatest exponent of the Kashmir 
Saiva tradidon of Trika. 


Dr. Bettina Baumer, a Sanskrit 
scholar from Austria, is at present 
research director of Alice Boner 
Foundation and Hon. Project 
Coordinator of Indira Gandhi 
National Center for the Arts. 


SIVA SUTRAS 

The Yoga of Supreme Identity 
JAIDEVA SE^IGH 

Siva Sutras are considered to be a revezJed book of the Yoga: 
Supreme identity of the individual self with the Divine. A long 
introduction, together with an abstract of each sutra, throws a 
flood of light on the entire system of Saiva Yoga. 


SPANDA-KARIKAS 

The Divine Creative Pulsation 
JATOEVA Singh 

This work elaborates the dynamic side of consciousness 
and serves as a commentary on the Siva Sutras. According 
to Saivagama, the Divine Consciousness is not simply cold, 
inert intellection. It is r3.xhGT spanda, active, dynamic, 
throbbing with life, creative pulsation. 

VIJNANABHAIRAVA OR DIVINE 
CONSCIOUSNESS 

jAIDEVL^^JlNGH 

A classical treatise of yoga practices and phflosophy 
according to the Kashmir tradition {of Saivism. 
Vijndnabhairc^a -i§^ a very ancient book on Yoga. It 
studiously eschews ih^chanical worship, external rites 
and ceremonies and gpes directly to the heart of the 
problem of the union of numan consciousness with the 
Divine. It describes 112 types ol'yoga. For this purpose, it 
makes full use of all the aspects of human life— prana, 
manas, imagination and intuition. 


ISBN 978-81-208-0472-2 


9788120 804722 


Kashmir Shaivism 
nilbd@vsnl.com 
Website: www.mlbd.com 
j Rs. S50 

MOmAL BANARSroASS PUBUSHERS PVT. LTD 


1903 
































