T      (‘woven together’ in Sanskrit) is the Hindu-based religion
      which originated , years ago, when the great erotic temples
were built. In the West it is now best known for the inspiration of
tantric yoga, and its associated ritualistic forms of sex. But is Tantra
just about esoteric sexual practice or does it amount to something
more? This lively and original book contributes to a more complete
understanding of Tantra’s mysteries by discussing the idea of the
body in Hindu tantric thought and practice in India.
    The author argues that within Tantra the body is a vehicle for
the spirituality that is fundamental to people’s lives. The tantric
body cannot be understood outside the traditions and texts that give
it form. Through practice (ritual, yoga and ‘reading’) the body is
formed into a pattern determined by tradition, and the practitioner
thereby moulds his or her life into the shape of the tradition. While
there is a great range of tantric bodies – from ascetics living in cre-
mation grounds, to low-caste people possessed by tantric deities, to
sophisticated high-caste Brahmans expounding the ascetic philosophy
of Tantra – all share certain common assumptions and processes.
Flood argues that while there is a divergence at different social levels
and in different levels of tantric metaphysical claims, these levels
are united by a process which the author calls ‘entextualisation of
the body’. The body becomes the text through the tradition being
inscribed on it. This general claim is tested against speciﬁc ritual
and doctrinal examples, and the tantric traditions are linked to wider
social and political forces.
    The Tantric Body is a fascinating study that makes an important
contribution to the study of South Asian religion, and will have
strong appeal to students of South Asian societies and cultures as
well as to those of comparative philosophy.

G F is Professor of Religion at the University of Stirling
and Academic Director of the Oxford Centre for Hindu Studies.
He is the author of An Introduction to Hinduism () and general
editor of The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism ().
        The Tantric Body
The Secret Tradition of Hindu Religion


           
                          Published in  by
                         I.B. Tauris & Co. Ltd
                      Salem Rd, London  
                  Fifth Avenue, New York  
                           www.ibtauris.com
  In the United States and Canada distributed by Palgrave Macmillan,
a division of St. Martin’s Press,  Fifth Avenue, New York,  
                     Copyright © Gavin Flood 
  The right of Gavin Flood to be identiﬁed as the author of this work
  has been asserted by him in accordance with the Copyright, Designs
                         and Patents Act, 
               Frontispiece: Cakra man (Wellcome Ms β).
               With kind permission of the Wellcome Trust.
All rights reserved. Except for brief quotations in a review, this book, or
 any part thereof, may not be reproduced, stored in or introduced into a
retrieval system, or transmitted, in any form or by any means, electronic,
  mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise, without the prior
                   written permission of the publisher.
                             (Hb)
                             (Pb)
                              (Hb)
                              (Pb)
  A full CIP record for this book is available from the British Library
A full CIP record for this book is available from the Library of Congress
               Library of Congress catalog card: available
       Typeset in Monotype Ehrhardt by illuminati, Grosmont,
                     www.illuminatibooks.co.uk
     Printed and bound in Great Britain by T.J. International Ltd,
                         Padstow, Cornwall
                          Contents




    Preface                                        ix

              PA RT I   Theory, Text and History

   Introduction: The Body as Text                 
    Tantra, Tradition and the Body 
    Reading Strategies: Text 
    Reading Strategies: Body 
    Experience and Asceticism 
    The Argument of the Book 

   The Vedic Body                                 
    The Political and Social Context   
    Legal Discourse 
    Political Discourse 
    The Highest Good 

   The Tantric Revelation                         
    The Validity of Tantric Revelation 
    The P®ñcar®tra Revelation 
    The ˆaiva Revelation 
    Text and Tradition 
    The Tantric Theology of Revelation 
    Revelation and Doctrine 
   Tantric Civilisation                                
    The Divinisation of the Body as Root Metaphor 
    Tantric Polity 
    The Tantric Temple 
    Tantra and Erotic Sculpture 
    Possession 

                PA RT I I   The Body as Text

   The P®ñcar®tra                                     
    Emanationist Cosmology 
    The Puriﬁcation of the Body 
    The Bh‚ta˜uddhi in the Tantric Revelation 
    The Divinisation of the Body 
    Inner Worship 
    External Worship 

   ˆaiva Siddh®nta                                    
    Śaiva Siddh®nta Doctrine 
    The Tattva Hierarchy 
    The Six Paths 
    The Ritual Process: Initiation 
    The Ritual Process: Daily Rites 
    The Ritual Process: Behaviour 

   Ecstatic Tantra                                    
    Absolute Subjectivity and Indexicality 
    The Circle of Deities in the Body 
    Kun. d. alin¬ and the Cakras 
    Two Ritual Systems 

   The Tantric Imagination                            
    Vision 
    Gesture and Utterance   
    Icon 
    Indexicality 
    Reading 

    Epilogue                                           
Appendix: The Jay®khya-sam. hit®   

Abbreviations and Sources          

Notes                              

Suggested Further Reading          

Index                              
                              Preface




T       represents the application of a general theoretical
      framework to a body of tantric texts that I have been reading,
on and off, for a number of years. That theoretical framework
develops the theme of the relationship between subjectivity and text.
More precisely, the book offers a description and analysis of the idea
that subjectivity is textually mediated within a corpus of tantric texts
composed in the medieval period. To give an account of this textually
mediated subjectivity is also to give an account of the tantric body.
A tradition-speciﬁc understanding of self and body is constructed,
as it were, through the text. The book therefore does not claim to
be a work of Indology as such but draws on Indology to present a
particular reading of a range of textual material. This is a reading
of the body as represented within those texts, along with a tradition-
speciﬁc subjectivity that the body entails, and a discussion of the
implications of that reading in the context of a broader, historical
understanding. The speciﬁcity of the claim is that in the Hindu
tantric traditions focused primarily on the deities Vi◊n. u and ˆiva in
the early medieval period, the practitioner becomes divine through
the internalisation of the text, through the inscription of the body
by the text, and learns to inhabit a tradition speciﬁc subjectivity. The
text is mapped on to the body. The range of texts I discuss is from
the Vai◊n. ava and ˆaiva tantric traditions, namely the P®ñcar®tra, the
x                        The Tantric Body

ˆaiva Siddh®nta, and the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions often referred
to as ‘Kashmir’ ˆaivism that developed particularly from the ninth
to eleventh centuries. While the examples I discuss illustrate my
general point, a much wider range of textual material could have been
presented but for reasons of space. I do not focus on later tantric
traditions and do not deal with the ˆr¬ Vidy®, although the general
framework I develop would be equally applicable there.

Most of this book was written during a wonderful year as a visiting
scholar at the University of Virginia and I should like to thank both
staff and students for discussion about the project and their astute
observations. The two graduate seminars I conducted were especially
helpful in testing ideas and I would like to thank all the students
in those classes, including Wijitha Bandara, Suzanne Bessenger,
Kristen Calgaro, David Divalerio, Andrew Godreau, Julian Green,
Chris Hatchell, Gavin Irby, Sara Jacobi, Slava Komarovski, Karen
Lemoine, Bianca Pandit, John Paul Patterson, Matt Rose, Carl
Yamamoto, Umeyye Yazicioglu and Yongbok Yi. I would especially
like to acknowledge conversations with James Gentry, who coined a
felicitous phrase ‘variable indexicality’ to describe some of this work,
Andres Montano, Lynna Dhanani and Craig Danielson. I became a
student at the stimulating class on Buddhist tantric traditions across
Asia conducted by Professors Paul Groner and David Germano,
where I learned much (not least the advantages of team teaching).
I also gained a lot from the ‘Tantra lunches’ organised by Peter
Ochs, where ‘tantric’ topics were opened out for discussion within
a wider milieu and in the context of other traditions and other
thought worlds. These lunches provided an informal yet rigorous
forum and, along with professors Groner, Germano and Ochs, I
particularly appreciated the contributions of Jeffrey Hopkins and
Jamie Ferriera. This was an extremely engaging experience, true to
the dialogic nature that should characterise comparative religion.
    There are many debts of gratitude in a book such as this. I should
also like to acknowledge those teachers who ﬁrst introduced me to
the study of tantric traditions, Andrew Rawlinson and David Smith
at Lancaster, a few conversations with the charismatic Agehananda
Bharati, and a dept of gratitude to Alexis Sanderson of Oxford, who
                               Preface                              xi

has so often responded to my questions with generosity and cordiality
and to André Padoux, a great scholar who has done so much to
further our understanding of the tantric traditions. The ˆaiva texts
were very much brought to life for me at the Centre d’Indologie
in Pondicherry some years ago, where I had the good fortune to
discuss these topics with Dominic Goodall and to read sections of
texts with the deeply knowledgeable ˆaivasiddh®nta Tattvajñ® R.
Subramanian and Dr T. Ganesan. Frits Staal indirectly introduced
me to the tantric tradition of Kerala and to my friend and col-
league, anthropologist Rich Freeman, who introduced me directly
to that tradition. I should like to thank him for his reﬂections on
our shared interest in linguistic anthropology and for his extremely
important theory of ritual possession in the tantric context as the
paradigm for the divinisation of icon and priest. His theory has been
a strong inﬂuence on my own thinking. I remember with fondness
the somewhat bizarre situation of reading together, late into the
night, sections of the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati in an old house in
a remote Welsh village. Lastly I should like to thank the I.B. Tauris
readers for their encouragement. I trust the publisher’s title does
not detract from the contents. A grant from the AHRB in the UK
allowed me relief from teaching to pursue this book during –.
Unless otherwise stated, translations are my own, although Marion
Rastelli’s work on the Jay®khya-sam. hit® has been a source of guid-
ance at times when the precise meaning of that text has eluded me.
An appendix presents the ﬁrst English translation of one chapter
from the published edition of the Jay®khya-sam. hit®. Although I
trust the translations are accurate, I have tried to err on the side of
readability for the English speaker. I was unable to incorporate an
important article that only came to my attention as the book went
to press, namely Barbara Holdredge’s ‘Body Connections: Hindu
Discourse of the Body and the Study of Religion’ (International
Journal of Hindu Studies, / (), pp. –).
Oui, par le corps
Dans la douceur qui est aveugle et ne veut rien
Mais parachève.
         Yves Bonnefoy, ‘L’épars, l’indivisible’
         

Theory, Text and History
                                 

         Introduction: The Body as Text




W        at the end of the nineteenth century, the eminent
        Indologist Monier Monier-Williams was able to say that the
Tantras are ‘mere manuals of mystics, magic and superstition of
the worst and most silly kind’1 and that with these texts and their
traditions ‘we are confronted with the worst results of the worst
superstitious ideas that have ever disgraced and degraded the human
race’.2 On this view, the Tantras are a far cry from the nobility of
Ved®nta or the dignity of the Buddha. In complete contrast, almost
a hundred years later at the end of the twentieth century, Bhagavan
Shree Rajneesh was able to write ‘tantra cannot be understood
because tantra is not an intellectual proposition: it is an experience.
Unless you are receptive, ready, vulnerable to the experience, it is
not going to come to you.’3 On the one hand we have the critical
Indologist writing from within the horizon of the values of his own
culture about texts and traditions in clear antipathy to them; on
the other we have a modern ‘mystic’ or experientialist writing from
within the horizon of values emerging in late modernity.
   This book might be seen as corrective reading of both views in
that it seeks to understand the tantric traditions in their historical and
doctrinal contexts and to offer constructive readings of the texts that
are true to Indology and sympathetic to the internal concerns of the
traditions, while at the same time offering a ‘third-order’ discourse
                        The Tantric Body

about them.4 More speciﬁcally, I wish to understand the tantric body,
how the body has been conceptualised by tantric traditions and the
use of the body in tantric visions of power and liberation. There
are complex problems here and we will need to examine the body
in terms of technique, in terms of representation, and in terms
of formation. Furthermore, we need to ask how techniques of the
body and the representation of the body (in metaphor and textual
description) interface with Indian scriptural traditions and socio-
political structures. On the one hand we have techniques of the body,
methods or technologies developed within tantric traditions intended
to transform body and self; on the other we have representations
of the body in philosophy, in ritual and in art.5 Both of these areas
– techniques of experience and representation of body and experi-
ence – are intimately linked. Representations (particularly icons of
deities) are not simply passive texts but are performative, used in
‘life transforming practices’,6 and, conversely, techniques of the body
themselves entail representations of it, especially in ritual where the
body becomes the deity or icon. Indeed, both representation and
technique come together in the divinisation of the body which, as
we will see, is the hallmark of tantric culture. We need therefore to
explicate the interrelated distinctions of representation/technique
and doctrine/ritual, which are encompassed by the text/body distinc-
tion. One might even say that as text is to body, so representation and
doctrine are to technique and ritual; that is the former is expressed
in the latter and the latter is articulated in the former. The text is
expressed as body and the body articulated in the text.
    I therefore wish to present an argument to support three inter-
related views. First, in spite of divergent metaphysical claims
and different social locations, the conceptualisation of the tantric
body and its expression follows certain principles or processes that
might be best expressed in the claim that the tantric body becomes
inscribed by the text. What we might call an entextualisation of
the body occurs in tantric traditions that is speciﬁc yet allows a
divergence of views and practices. The body is moulded within the
constraints of historical tradition, even in its attempt to transcend
those constraints. Second, the body, functioning as the root meta-
phor or topos of the tantric traditions, operates at different levels
                         The Body as Text                            

of practice and discourse. The body is the vehicle for imagining and
conceptualising tradition and cosmos such that the structure of the
cosmos, forms of language, and text and tradition are themselves
understood in terms of the body. Representations of the body occur
in texts and in the techniques of the body such as ritual and asceti-
cism; the body itself functions as a representation of tradition, text
and cosmos. While I think the claim that the body becomes the
text or is inscribed as text is true of all scriptural traditions, this
book intends to examine the speciﬁcity of the claim within Hindu
Tantrism. Third, operating within these claims about the body and
tradition is the idea of a tradition-dependent subjectivity; that the
index of the ﬁrst-person pronoun, the ‘I’, operates within realms of
practice and discourse constrained by text and tradition. By ‘sub-
jectivity’ I do not intend a monad set against the objectivity of the
world but rather interiority formed through language and tradition.
This linguistic agency is not ﬁxed but in dialogical relationship
with others and with social structures and might be called ‘variable
indexicality’.7 This is another way of expressing the body as text in
that when the body functions within the tradition-speciﬁc activities
of reading, ritual and asceticism, different notions of the subject
come into view. The content of the ‘I’ is ﬁlled out in different ways
in these contexts. For example, the tantric practitioner, as we shall
see, identiﬁes his body with the cosmos and deity in daily ritual
and in yogic practice, identifying himself with something outside
of himself that he then becomes.
   While my main purpose is to locate the tantric body within the
history of ideas, practices and institutions that made up the early
formation of medieval India, I would also contend that this reﬂection
raises questions of contemporary cultural and theological relevance.
The tantric body is of more than historical interest, as is evident
through its mass appropriation in consumerist culture, and raises
such challenging cultural questions about the nature of the body,
about the relation of the body to language, about human relation-
ships, about the relationship of the human to the wider ecosystem
and raises such challenging theological and philosophical questions
about the relation of the body to any transcendent reality and about
ways traditions construct the self, as to be worth taking seriously as
                        The Tantric Body

a resource in our response to such questions. While it is important
to maintain discourses within the boundaries of tradition in order
for them to retain meaning and relevance for particular communities
of readers, it is also germane, enriching and challenging to engage
theologically and philosophically with thought systems outside of
those discourses. Although I do not directly address questions of
theological relevance, my third-order reﬂection nevertheless goes
beyond the description of text and tradition established through the
mediating, second-order discourse of philology and history.
   In the following pages, the reader will ﬁnd an argument that the
tantric body can only be understood in terms of text and tradition. In
my local phone book there is an advertisement for ‘cakra balancing’
for a reasonable fee (in this respect clearly in accordance with tantric
dak◊in. ®). Implicit here is a Western appropriation of the tantric body
that we might see as a reiﬁcation of it, and a view that the tantric
body is something that can be revealed for those with the means
to do so.8 The argument of this book, on the contrary, is that in
its medieval Indian context the tantric body is not a given that is
discovered but a process that is constructed through dedicated effort
over years of practice. The centres of power or cakras within the
body that the phone book advert alludes to can be best understood
in terms of entextualisation, the body inscribed as the text, which
expresses principles at work within the logic of tantric ideology
and practice. Any distinctions between knowing and acting, mind
and body, are disrupted by the tantric body in the sense that what
might be called imagination becomes a kind of action in tantric ritual
and the forms that the body takes in ritual are a kind of knowing.
Borrowing a phrase from William Blake (and if the adjective ‘tantric’
can apply outside of Hindu and Buddhist scriptural traditions, then
surely he is a good candidate for its application) the tantric body is
a ‘corporeal understanding’.9 This corporeal understanding shows
itself in the great emphasis on transformative practices in the tantric
traditions, ritual inseparable from vision, the body becoming alive
with the universe within it, and vibrant with futurity in the antici-
pation of the goal of the tantric paths.
   Understanding the tantric body in its historical locations is no
easy task and it is not simply a matter of contrasting an inauthentic
                         The Body as Text                           

Western view of the tantric body, outside of tradition, with an
authentic tantric view, moulded in accordance with tradition. The
very category ‘Tantra’ or ‘Tantrism’ is contested and itself must be
seen in the context of the history of scholarship in the West and
colonialism, as some scholars are doing. Understanding the Western
tantric body in relation to modernity and postmodernity is a topic
in itself,10 and the only claim I wish to make about that body is that
it is modernist in reﬂecting the reifying tendencies of modernity
along with the idea of the practitioner as free-ﬂoating individual.
By contrast, the traditional tantric body of medieval India is more
ﬂuid in terms of its lack of reiﬁcation and at the same time more
conservative in being deeply embedded in traditional understand-
ings and categories. The tantric body is formed in accordance with
received tradition, in accordance with scriptural revelation, and in
accordance with the somatology of the wider culture. The cultiva-
tion of a tantric subjectivity is not the cultivation of individuality
(see pp. –).


               Tantra, Tradition and the Body

The tantric traditions arose during the early centuries of the common
era, developing in Buddhist, Jain and Hindu contexts. The vast body
of tantric texts are inseparable from the traditions that gave rise
to them. ˆaiva, Vai◊n. ava and ˆ®kta Tantras were believed by their
followers to have been revealed by Vi◊n. u, ˆiva, and the Goddess
(Dev¬), and there were even Tantras revealed by the Sun (S‚ry®),
now all lost, whose followers were called Sauras.11 There were also
Jain Tantras believed to be the word of Mah®v¬ra and, above all,
Buddhist Tantras believed to be the word of the Buddha, which
became incorporated into the vast Buddhist canon between c. 
and  , to this day integral to the living traditions of Tibetan
Buddhism.12 Using the term ‘Hindu’ to refer to the ˆaiva, ˆ®kta
Vai◊n. ava and Saura material is anachronistic as the term was used
by the Persians simply to denote the peoples of the subcontinent,13
although there are usages of it as a term of self-description by
‘Hindus’ as early as the ﬁfteenth century in Kashmir and sixteenth
                       The Tantric Body

century in Bengal to distinguish people who shared certain cultural
values and practices (such as cremation of the dead, veneration
of the cow, styles of cuisine and dress, or shared narratives) from
Muslims (‘Yavanas’).14 It was not a common designation until the
nineteenth century. But the theistic Tantras and traditions, those of
Vi◊n. u, ˆiva and the Goddess, are interrelated and share common
structures of practice and belief that can be distinguished from those
of the Buddhists and Jains by their proximity to the Vedas, orthodox
Brahmanical revelation, and their interpreters. The term ‘tantric
tradition’ refers to those religions, or ‘ways of life’ to use Inden’s
apposite phrase,15 that claimed to develop from textual sources
referring to themselves as ‘tantras’, regarded as revelation, the word
of God, by their followers. This diverse tantric revelation must be
seen in contrast to the ancient, orthodox Brahmanical revelation
of the Veda that the Tantras reject completely or accept as a lower
level of scriptural authority. In contrast to the Hindu Tantras, the
Buddhist Tantras do not respond to the vedic tradition but rather
look to Mah®y®na Buddhism and see themselves as a development of
it, even though much Buddhist tantric material, the Yogin¬ Tantras,
was probably derived from ˆaiva prototypes.16
    Arriving at deﬁnitions of ‘Tantra’ and ‘Tantrism’ has been notori-
ously difﬁcult and has varied between presenting external accounts
of a phenomenon named ‘Tantrism’17 and internal accounts of what
the term tantra refers to. An important indigenous distinction is
between t®ntrika, a follower of the Tantras, and vaidika, a follower
of the Vedas. This distinction operates across the sectarian divides
of ˆaivas, Vai◊n. avas and so on. The former refers to those who
follow a system of ritual and teaching found within the Tantras,
in contrast to those, especially the Brahman caste, who follow the
Veda as primary revelation or ˜ruti (and so called ˆrautas), or who
follow the later texts of secondary revelation called smr. ti (and so
called Sm®rtas).18 The issue is complicated, however, by some
vedic Brahmans, particularly Sm®rtas, observing tantric rites and,
as Padoux has observed, some texts in the vedic tradition, namely
Upani◊ads, being clearly tantric in character, ‘which t®ntrika authors
(Bh®skarar®ya, for example) consider as conﬁrming the validity of
tantric teachings and practices’.19
                         The Body as Text                             

   The primary designation of the term tantra is a ‘loom’ or the
‘warp’ of a loom, with the metaphorical implication of system or
framework. It is derived from the verbal root tan, to extend or stretch
and so, perhaps not insigniﬁcantly, is related to tanu, ‘body’. It came
early on to designate a text and there are several examples of the
term being used for texts that are clearly not within the tantric tradi-
tion, such as the collection of stories the Pañcatantra or the famous
M¬m®m. saka work the Tantrav®rttika. The term tantra as a noun is
a term of self-description that refers to speciﬁc texts of revelation
and is also a term designating a system of revealed teaching that
leads to liberation and power. In this sense the term tantra˜®stra
is used, which, as David White observes, is the closest indigenous
category to the English ‘Tantrism’.20 The term ®gama is used in
some ˆaiva texts as a synonym for tantra with the implication that
the text is a disclosure that has come to us. Indeed, Abhinavagupta
uses the term to refer to the tantric revelation in general as the ‘one
revelation’ (ek®gama) (see pp. –). The term ‘tantra’ refers not
only to texts but to system and, as Padoux observes, asmin tantre
simply means ‘in this system’.21
   Some scholars have presented Tantrism in terms of a list of
characteristics, such as locating a bipolar energy within the body,22
while others have offered more precise deﬁnitions, which are in
fact theories, such as seeing Tantra as a quest for power akin to the
king’s quest for political power. Drawing on Madeleine Biardeau,
André Padoux offers the understanding that Tantrism is ‘an attempt
to place k®ma, desire, in every sense of the word, in the service of
liberation’,23 and David White further develops this in terms of
energy.24 The word ‘power’ has perhaps a more negative semantic
ﬁeld in English than ‘energy’, and power relates to the political
and historical world in a way that ‘energy’ does not, although both
can be renderings of the Sanskrit ˜akti. One interesting thesis
presented by Ron Davidson in the context of tantric Buddhism is
that the central ‘sustaining metaphor’ of the Mantray®na, or tantric
Buddhism, is that the path of the practitioner is akin to the path
of the king on his way to becoming an overlord (r®j®dhir®ja) or
universal monarch (cakrav®rtin), expressed through the forms of
consecration, self-visualisation, man. ¥alas and ‘esoteric acts’.25 This
                       The Tantric Body

focusing on the political dimension of the metaphor of power is
clearly important, and power suffuses the concerns of the tantric
traditions. The Tantras offer their followers power to achieve world
transcendence or magical power over supernatural entities in order
to achieve worldly success, such as seduction of a desired woman
or the destruction of enemies for a king. Sanderson has pointed
out that the tantric traditions of power deﬁned themselves against
the vedic tradition of purity and saw their power as lying in the
transgression of vedic social norms.26
    Davidson accompanies his claim about the central metaphor of the
Mantray®na with a discussion of ‘polythetic’ categories that function
‘to identify prototypical examples that operate as cognitive refer-
ence points’.27 That is, rather than a ‘monothetic’ understanding of
Tantrism, such as Tsong-ka-pa’s deﬁnition of Tantra as visualisation
of oneself as the Buddha or deity, we need to understand Tantrism
in ‘polythetic’ terms. That is, no one thing can be taken to describe
a category but, rather, prototypical examples can be identiﬁed which
may not share all of the traits within the category. As Brooks ob-
serves, ‘tantric phenomena need not possess all the deﬁning charac-
teristics of the taxon “tantric” and there is no a priori justiﬁcation
for deciding that any single characteristic is the most deﬁnitive.’28
While perhaps the terms ‘monthetic’ and ‘polythetic’ are somewhat
unnecessary, the now popular use of prototype theory does have
force in the understanding of cultural categories.29 As discussed by
Davidson, a robin (both English and American) is a prototypical bird,
whereas an emu is not, but is still within the category. A member
of a category does not need to share all characteristics to belong:
categories have ‘fuzzy’ edges.30 Of course, any inclusion in a category
as prototypical will involve judgements which need to be based on
careful consideration, comparison and scholarship. Due to scholarly
endeavour, especially over the last ﬁfty years, we now know enough
about tantric traditions to make some claims about them and to make
judgements about prototypicality. One such judgement that I would
wish to make is that tantric traditions must be understood in terms
of pre-modern scriptural traditions, and another is that they involve
the divinisation of the body, which is way of saying that the body
is inscribed by the text.
                         The Body as Text                          

   Davidson’s account of Tantrism in terms of power is important
and it is surely germane to point to the political dimensions of the
tantric practitioner that have been generally neglected or ignored
(probably partly due to the clear separation of ‘politics’ from ‘re-
ligion’ that has, rightly or wrongly, characterised Western scholar-
ship). The practitioner, in Davidson’s reading of the texts, seeks to
assume kingship and exercise dominion. We could, however, read
this in a slightly different way, that the central tantric metaphor is
indeed, as Tsong-ka-pa identiﬁed, divinisation and that the model
of kingship – the king undergoing consecration and so on – is in
fact the king becoming divine. The divinisation of the king through
ritual consecration is directly akin to the divinisation of the icon
in a temple and the divinisation of the practitioner in daily ritual
(or even the divinisation in possession). More fundamental than
the metaphor of kingship is the metaphor of transformation into a
deity. The idea that to worship a god one must become a god is a
notable feature of all tantric traditions, even ones which maintain
a dualist metaphysics.
   The empowering of the body, which means its divinisation, is
arguably the most important quality in tantric traditions, but a
quality that is only speciﬁed within particular traditions and texts.
Becoming divine is an ancient trope in Indian civilisation. As Hocart
observed long ago with reference to the consecration of the vedic
king, it is fundamental ‘that the worshipper becomes one with the
god to whom the worship is addressed’.31 Divinisation in tantric
ritual reﬂects this general idea but is text- and tradition-speciﬁc
in terms of content and in the explicit focus on the divinisation
of the body as the enactment of its revelation, as this book hopes
to demonstrate. The practitioner in ritual contexts becomes divine
such that his or her limited subjectivity is transcended or expanded
and that subjectivity becomes coterminous with the subjectivity of
his or her deity, which is to say that the text is internalised and
subjectivity becomes text-speciﬁc. This is clearly in line with Tsong-
ka-pa’s understanding in a Buddhist context and also makes sense
in a theistic ‘Hindu’ one.32 While the idea of liberation as becoming
one with the absolute (brahman) has a long history in Brahmanical
thinking from the Upani◊ads, the ritual construction of the body
                        The Tantric Body

as the deity through the use of magical phrases or mantras is proto-
typically tantric.33
    In a broader sense, the tantric traditions are examples of forms
of practice and reﬂection handed down through generations which
locate themselves historically by reference to a foundational text or
group of texts, believed to originate in a transcendent source. This
is, of course, true of many traditions including Islam, Judaism and
Christianity, as well as vedic tradition. But while this is a general
point, it is nevertheless an important one, for processes of identi-
ﬁcation and entextualisation can be identiﬁed within wider scrip-
tural traditions that are also typical of tantric traditions. Scriptural
traditions all developed before modernity and before the Kantian
understanding of the self as an autonomous agent; an idea that
connects with the notion of the citizen who has civic responsibilities
yet who remains distinct from the social body and an individuality
that comes to stand against tradition. In scriptural traditions, such a
notion has been alien, and the self is an index of a tradition-speciﬁc
subjectivity, formed in particular ways in conformity to tradition.34
In scriptural traditions, the self is constructed through ritual and the
development of a tradition-speciﬁc interiority or variable indexicality
that is not individual in the contemporary, de-traditionalised sense
(characterised by fragmentation and alienation). Scripture-sanctioned
rituals serve as identity markers for communities in medieval India,
and, although these boundaries can be transgressed,35 such transgres-
sion always assumes their existence. The self in such communities
is bounded by text and ritual. Such a tradition-speciﬁed self, as
MacIntyre reminds us, develops philosophy as a craft or techne and
needs to develop his or herself into ‘a particular kind of person if
he or she is to move towards a knowledge of the truth about his or
her good and the human good’.36 Tantra can itself be seen in terms
of techne, and the sufﬁx tra expresses the means or instrument of
an action expressed by a verbal root.37 Thus as man-tra might be
rendered ‘instrument of thought’38 so tan-tra might literally be taken
to mean ‘method or instrument of extension’, perhaps with the
implication that it is the self or body that is extended to become
coterminous with the divine body. I do not intend this etymology
(nirvacana) to be taken too seriously, but it is nevertheless suggestive.
                         The Body as Text                            

The speciﬁcity of the tantric traditions lies in the ways in which they
form a subjectivity, the ways in which the subject of ﬁrst-person
predicates, the ‘I’, becomes an index of tradition, and the way the
body becomes entextualised. Patterns of text are mapped on to the
body in ways particular to Tantrism and in response to other ways
of mapping texts on to the body, especially vedic ones.
    The theory I wish to present is simply this. The tantric body is
encoded in tradition-speciﬁc and text-speciﬁc ways. The practitioner
inscribes the body through ritual and forms of interiority or asceti-
cism, and so writes the tradition on to the body. Such transformative
practices are intended to create the body as divine. This inscribing
the body is also a reading of text and tradition. Indeed, the act of
reading is of central importance in the tantric traditions. The fact
that the texts were written is important and has sometimes been
underestimated in focusing on orality/aurality in the transmission
of texts. But the texts were written in Sanskrit and in doing so their
authors were consciously locating them within what Sheldon Pollock
has called the ‘Sanskrit cosmopolis’.39 The texts were intended to be
read and heard by those with the requisite authority, to be brought to
life, and to be performed. The importance of the written word here
is evident from the commentaries upon the primary texts by the later
tradition. The importance of reading the texts is further suggested by
the presence of ritual manuals (paddhatis), ‘cookbooks’ that served to
instruct and remind practitioners about how to undertake particular
kinds of performance and about particular tenets of a system. The
tantric body, constructed as a public act (even if limited in its public
nature through secrecy), is in turn ‘read’ by traditional practition-
ers in so far as some t®ntrikas wore external signs of their cultic
afﬁliation while others disparaged such signs, retaining their tantric
afﬁliation as ‘secret’;40 such secrecy is an overcoding of the body.
That is, while some tantric traditions overtly reject vedic tradition
and normative, caste and feudal society of medieval India, most must
be seen as adding their own writing of the body on to the traditional
vedic writing or as reconﬁguring the vedic tradition in terms of the
tantric. We see this, for example, in the ˆaiva traditions of Kashmir
so eloquently accounted for by Abhinavagupta (c. – ). For
him, tantric rites were supererogatory to vedic practice. The body,
                       The Tantric Body

the vedic body, is overwritten by the practitioner who constructs
a tantric body through a further superimposition of rites and the
internalisation of a tantric ideology. Thus, in his famous statement
(probably a standard saying), Abhinavagupta writes that externally
one follows vedic practice, in the domestic sphere one is an orthodox
ˆaiva, but in one’s secret life one is a follower of the extreme anti-
nomian cult of the Kula which involves the disruption of the vedic
body through ritual transgression of vedic norms and values.41
   In locating the tantric body within an account of text, I intend
to discuss a clearly articulated cultural form that has developed
well beyond its roots. There is much speculation about the origins
of Tantrism. On the one hand the origins have been seen in an
autochthonous spirituality or Shamanism that reaches back to pre-
§ryan times in the subcontinent, yet textual historical evidence
only dates from a more recent period. While certainly there are
elements in tantric traditions that may well reach back into pre-
history – particularly the use of skulls and the themes of death
and possession42 – we simply do not have sufﬁcient evidence to
speculate in this way. As Robert Mayer has shown, there is no
evidence for a non-§ryan substratum for Tantrism, which must be
understood as a predominantly Brahmanical, Sanskritic tradition
with its roots in the Veda.43 In an important book on the origins of
Indian civilisation, Sergent has argued that our main resources for
understanding the past are linguistic and archaeological.44 There is
no early archaeological evidence for tantric traditions beyond the
common era, and while there is textual evidence for a cremation
ground asceticism as far back as the time of the Buddha,45 as well
as tantric-like goddesses in the Veda,46 the speciﬁcity of the tantric
revelation appears more recently in the history of South Asia. India
clearly inherits its earlier Indus civilisation (as shown, for example,
by the persistence of common kinds of measurement)47 but speciﬁc
tantric elements cannot be located other than in very general ways.
Traditions are constantly reconﬁgured in the light of contemporary
situations and there is no reason to think that the tantric traditions
are any different. While of course receiving forms of practice and
ideas handed down from the past, the Tantras at the time of their
composition were a new revelation that transcended the older, vedic
                         The Body as Text                            

texts. While concerned with body and experience, this tantric body
can only be accessed via the texts that form it.


                    Reading Strategies: Text

The argument I wish to present is not historically neutral in the
sense that the Encyclopaedist mind-set of Enlightenment modernity,
described by MacIntyre, might understand neutrality as a single
framework within which knowledge is presented.48 Nor does it
assume that all knowledge is purely subjectively constructed and that
history masks a will to power of particular interest groups. Rather,
agreeing with MacIntyre’s general argument, I take rational inquiry
(such as this) to be enabled by traditions of inquiry, and such inquiry
is less a discovery of the past and more the construction of the past
from a particular perspective or standpoint. The past is constantly
reconﬁgured in the light of new evidence for a given purpose. That
there are degrees of accuracy in such reconﬁgurations is not in
question. Clearly there are positions and readings of the past that
contain such prior ideological commitments as to distort the past, as
we see in more recent reconﬁgurings of Indian history seen through
the lens of a hindutva ideology. But this very claim can itself only be
based on the presentation of evidence in a different vein, drawing
from a rationality of historical method that has developed within
the Western academy, a rationality which would, of course, claim a
methodological superiority to the hindutva reading. But the point is
that the presentation and weighing of historical evidence is always
within a tradition of inquiry and judgement. Yet this tradition that
claims universal truth accessible through an objective, repeatable
method needs to acknowledge reﬂexively that it is itself a tradition
of inquiry that never attain its own declared universalist goal. The
Encyclopaedist claim to objectivity and neutrality is itself a tradition
of presentation and assessment according to criteria developed only
within that tradition and not, as that tradition claims, the discovery
of a single, neutral narrative.49
    To establish the account of the tantric body I have brieﬂy described
above, I am bringing together two primary traditions of discourse,
                        The Tantric Body

Indology and what might be described as a post-foundational reli-
gious studies. At one level the modernist or objectivist assumptions
of Indology are fundamentally opposed to a post-foundational under-
standing of text as inﬁnitely interpretable. Yet any rigorous post-
foundational understanding must assume Indology as the discipline
that provides the basic materials from which to develop. Indology
is the philological study of Sanskrit texts which is the sine qua
non for the study of tantric traditions. Without Indology there can
be no study of Tantrism. But while one can understand the claim
that philology is the eradication of subjectivity in that the objective
system of grammar, the language itself, eradicates subjectivist inter-
pretations, there is nevertheless a further level of reading beyond the
philological, which intends to place philological readings in a broader
context. We might say that philology is indispensable in establishing
the plain sense of the texts, yet we must go beyond philology to
establish interpreted senses. If philology creates Nietzsche’s pathos
of distance, it is nevertheless also the case that a text is nothing until
it is read and interpreted.50
    I shall defer a discussion of the nature of tantric texts to the next
chapter, but sufﬁce it to say for now that these texts are set within
the context in which they echo and reﬂect other texts and in which
textual agency is complex because often the texts have multiple
authors or were composed over a long period of time. In reading
these texts we need to be sensitive to the wider textual ﬁeld in which
they are located. To use Inden’s phrase, we need to move from
philological texts to dialogical texts.51 There is a useful distinction
within rabbinic Judaism between the plain sense of the text (peshat)
and the interpreted sense (derash). The plain sense is the foundation
upon which the interpreted sense is built,52 although even the plain
sense is immediately interpreted once read. We might say that the
plain sense operates as a constraining force upon the interpreted
sense. The interpreted sense should not disrupt the plain sense to
the extent that it contradicts it, yet the plain sense is never enough
for a particular situation. Interpreted senses are always necessary to
bring some meaning to life for some particular community of readers.
A post-foundational religious studies develops an interpreted sense
of the texts established through Indology, one which takes seriously
                         The Body as Text                            

the implicit and explicit philosophical claims of the texts but does
not share (indeed cannot share) the texts’ theological presuppositions.
This book is no tantric theology but a dialogical reading that stands
outside of the texts while partially entering into them in an act of
imagination that allows for their reconstruction and reconﬁguring
in a new mode. That new mode is the account I present of the
tantric body as text.
    While Indology and post-foundational developments in religious
studies are fundamental to my reading strategy, there is also implicit
in the book a theory of reading religious texts that I have developed
with my colleague Oliver Davies, which needs brieﬂy to be explicated
before we proceed.53 The way in which the body becomes the text in
tantric traditions needs to be understood in terms not only of how
the content of texts is imposed upon the body, but in terms of the
very nature of the texts and how they are received.
    Tantric texts can be divided into those texts of primary revelation,
the Tantras themselves believed to be the word of the deity, usually
in a dialogical form with the Goddess (ˆakti) asking questions of the
Lord (Bhagav®n), although in some texts the relationship is reversed,
and secondary works of commentary expounding the meaning of
a text, and works describing practice such as ritual manuals. The
Tantras at some point in their history, quite early, were ﬁxed in
writing. This is not to say that there were not different versions of
texts – the ˆaiva Siddh®nta theologian R®makan. ﬂha, for example,
had a number of readings of the Kiran. a-tantra to choose from54 (see
p. ) – but it is to say that the work achieved some stability through
time. In this sense the Tantras can be contrasted with the Vedas,
which were not written but nevertheless acquired a high degree of
ﬁxity due to methods of conveying them accurately within schools
of recitation. While the Tantras seem to have been written, they
were often accompanied by oral teachings and commentary, which
is corroborated by the sometimes obscure or pithy nature of the
material, and closely linked to systems of acceptance or initiation.
    Given that the Tantras achieved some stability through time, we
can also say that the meaning of the text and its function became
determined by the process of transmission. This is not to go against
the distinction between plain and interpreted sense, but rather to
                        The Tantric Body

say that the text remained alive by being received anew through the
generations. The texts of primary tantric revelation probably have
multiple authorship and were composed over several generations,
which makes agency within the text complex. Indeed, we need to
speak of agency within the texts themselves rather than the agency
of an individual author. The texts in their intertextuality take on
a life of their own. The intentionality of the text, which we might
call the ‘narrator’ and which Bakhtin called the ‘author’, interfaces
with the intentionality of the reader or community of readers who
internalise and reconstruct the text in their own lives. As in all texts
regarded as revelation, the Tantras were brought to life in the act
of reading or reception and in their performance. The receiver of
the Tantra, the t®ntrika, for whom it is divine word, internalises
the text through a process of identiﬁcation which usually involves
ritual enactment. The indexicality of the reader interfaces with the
indexicality of the text, and the subject of ﬁrst-person predicates,
the ‘I’, becomes an index of tradition (arguably, Greg Urban has
suggested, through the function of the ﬂoating signiﬁer itself 55). The
reader also positions himself (and it is usually a he in the tantric
traditions) in response to the notional reader assumed by the text,
usually an initiate.56 The reader interprets and internalises the text in
the act of understanding and in turn conforms himself to the reader
implied within the text. The reader does not simply interpret; the
text makes claims upon the initiated reader, which has signiﬁcant,
life-transforming effects.
    The sacred text is made ‘one’s own’ through reading and per-
formance, and the ‘reader’ conforms to the implied reader of the
text. This is as true of the tantric traditions as of other scriptural
religions. Such a reconstruction of the text in subjectivity is funda-
mental to the process of textual transmission and religious identity
formation. The linguistic anthropologists Greg Urban and Michael
Silverstein have identiﬁed two processes in textual transmission that
they call entextualisation and contextualisation, the taking of a text
out of one context and recontextualising it in a new, which are
simultaneous.57 The speech agent retrieves the text back into the
living matrix of speech through meaningful acts of reading and
performance, through encoding the body with the text. Such acts
                         The Body as Text                           

of reading retrieve a semantic entity from the past, the origin of the
revelation, into the present ﬁeld of meaning. Indeed, commentary
upon revealed text is just such a claiming of meaning, the fusion of
the world of the text with the reader’s own world and the attempted
persuading of others of one interpreted sense. Such a reception or
reading is communal and tradition-based, only taking shape within
communities that have themselves been shaped by prior acts of
reading of the same text or group of texts. Radically new or in-
novative readings might result in new communities being formed
and groups questioning the received wisdom of the old tradition.
Thus the Tantras of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta have been received by
a community of Brahmans who have themselves been formed by
the tradition constrained by the text. But monistic ˆaivas in the
ninth and tenth centuries offered corrective readings of the old
tradition which helped to form a new community of reading. A
community reads its own core texts and acts them out, readings
that are themselves already governed by the historical life of the
community grounded in successive and often corrective readings of
the same text or texts. The plain sense of the text gives rise to new
meanings in new contexts. The religious reader or community of
readers assumes that the voice within the ancient texts, the voice
of God in the case of the Hindu Tantras, has present force. This
is a fundamentally important point in the transmission of tradi-
tions, for only because of the present force of the text for a reader
or community of readers does the text have relevance, a relevance
principally enacted through ritual.
   For tantric traditions the immediacy of this divine voice can only
be accessed through the structures of tradition, involving structures
or systems of access, namely initiation, which give privileged access
to the text’s authenticity. As we will see, the ˆaiva Siddh®nta de-
mands an initiation into the tradition (samaya-d¬k◊®) to gain access
to its texts. This laying claim by the tradition to the space between
the reader and the text is to lay claim to the temporal and spatial
structures of the world within which the tradition-constrained act
of reading takes place. Thus for the tantric reader there is a strongly
cosmological dimension to any act of reading and any enactment of
the text in daily ritual. The world of the practitioner who acts out
                       The Tantric Body

the text is itself constructed by the text. There is, then, a complex
process of enacting an interpreted sense of the text in relation to
the plain sense, and of enacting the injunctive claims of the text on
its receivers. The Tantras have a unique intentionality that makes
claims on its receivers, who have enacted those injunctions through
to modernity.


                   Reading Strategies: Body

Having given some account of religious or revealed text, the modes
of approaching such texts, and a theory of scriptural reading, it
remains to make some remarks about what I understand by the term
‘body’ in my title and how I shall ‘read’ the body. In what ways
could the ‘tantric’ body be distinct from any other kind of body?
Clearly the tantric body is a different order category to ‘male’ or
‘female’ body, or ‘young’, ‘beautiful’, ‘lithe’, ‘sick’ or any number
of adjectives that could be placed before the noun. The link I wish
to establish between body and text more generally, and the tantric
body and tantric text speciﬁcally, needs to be placed in a broader
context of Western academic concern with the body.
   The body has become the focus of many disciplines in the academy
including anthropology, sociology, cultural studies, philosophy, liter-
ary studies, religious studies, and sub-branches of these, particularly
medical anthropology and the related enquiry into pain, sexuality,
emotion and agency. The development of interest in the body over
the last thirty years and the ‘somatisation’ of social theory58 might
themselves be of interest for the sociology of knowledge as an index
of wider cultural values, values that reﬂect a concern with gender,
the post-existential condition in the West after the Second World
War, and the recognition that we are embodied beings. Csordas has
observed that the turn to the body in the human sciences is linked
to the development of the postmodern condition of fragmented
meanings and that this turn reﬂects an attempt to grasp a stable
centre,59 yet this centre remains elusive because the body is not a
static, biological given, but has a history. The body changes through
time and across cultures.
                         The Body as Text                          

   I refer the interested reader to essays by Turner60 and Csordas61
for a coherent account of the development of interest in the body
in the Western academy, especially in sociology and anthropology.
To describe these developments here would take us too far from
our project, but it is worth pointing out that early interest in the
body and body symbolism begins in the Durkheimian tradition of
French sociology, particularly with an important paper by Marcel
Mauss on techniques of the body62 and with Hertz’s inﬂuential work
on right and left symbolism.63 Mary Douglas’s Purity and Danger
() marks a turning point and in Natural Symbols () Douglas
makes an important distinction between the social body and the
natural body. This, along with the publication of Blacking’s The
Anthropology of the Body in , began an interest in the body
that developed apace in the human and social sciences, which have
demonstrated the diverse ways in which the body is conceptualised
and formed.64
   In parallel to this sociological/anthropological concern, the body
became the focus of inquiry for philosophical phenomenology,
especially the work of Merleau-Ponty and his Phenomenology of
Perception (), which itself partly draws on the work on body
image in the s by a number of psychologists, most notable among
them being Paul Schilder.65 Turner observes that, whereas the French
phenomenologists are interested in the ‘lived body’, Douglas is con-
cerned with the body as a metaphor of socio-cognitive mappings of
reality.66 My concern here is with both, and both are brought together
in my argument. On the one hand the tantric body is a metaphor
that maps the cosmos, particularly in ritual activity; on the other
hand the tantric body is a lived body that performs that mapping, a
performance that had and has existential force in the lives of tantric
practitioners. The tantric body is both a metaphor of tantric ideas
about the cosmos and the human person and the lived body of the
practitioner who performs or enacts those ideas.
   In arguing for this connection between representation and tech-
nique, idea and performance, text and body, the book implicitly
and sometimes explicitly draws on the social scientiﬁc work on the
body carried out over the last century that I have alluded to above.
Many writers in the area of cultural theory, such as Donna Haraway,
                       The Tantric Body

have highlighted the politics of body representation and argued that
attempts to essentialise the body operate in the service of a hege-
monic discourse that functions to maintain cultural power interests,
particularly a biological discourse that links a proposed givenness of
the body to (oppressive) social roles.67 There can be no uncontested
nor unpoliticised deﬁnition of the body.68
    This general orientation of theory in favour of a socio-political
construction of the body and a suspicion of essentialism is within
what can broadly be described as genealogy (which is often subsumed
under the – inappropriate – title ‘critical theory’69). Indeed, much
literature and analysis of the body in culture and society have been
undertaken within the genealogical tradition of academic discourse,
ultimately stemming from Nietzsche and developed by Foucault, that
claims that the body is the locus of contested power. The body is
inscribed, both hegemonically by the self and by external relation-
ships, in accordance with the power structures of a given society
through time. The laying bare of these relationships and forms of
inscription through genealogical analysis is an attempt to dissolve
them and thereby to offer liberating social critique. Much of the
work of feminist scholarship, for example, has been concerned to
uncover foundations of patriarchal power upon which particular,
limiting constructions of the female body have been built.70 But
generally genealogy offers no positive proposal, only critique and a
hermeneutics suspicious of all cultural formations as hiding egre-
gious, oppressive power relations between groups.
    While being sympathetic to many claims of the genealogists, I
do not cohere with this view. The genealogical account of the body
would wish to claim that it is culturally or socially constructed and
that the construction of the body is its inscription by particular
power relationships. The body is not a given but embroiled in a
politics that needs to be negotiated throughout life. But while the
body is an ‘ambiguous space’, in Foucault’s phrase,71 it is never-
theless a contained ambiguity, contained (at least until recently) by
its genetic code, by its temporal structure and the inevitability of
birth and death. Indeed, it is here that we see one of the limits of the
genealogist’s social constructivist position. While conceptualisations
and practices of the body vary, there is a givenness of temporality in
                         The Body as Text                            

that the body is born, ages and dies. The temporality of being born,
aging and dying presents a boundary within which any formation
of the body must function. This boundary of temporality therefore
means that the body contains inherently within it a narrative struc-
ture. To speak of a body is to speak of temporality, and to speak
of a body is to speak of narrative. Narrative and the living body
are inseparable. The story of a life is the story of a body chang-
ing through time, and such a story inevitably entails the stories of
others, for, as MacIntyre observes, we are the co-authors of our
own narratives.72 The narrative structure of the body, being born
and dying, therefore entails communities of other narrative bodies
and the interrelation of bodies through time. Thus the body entails
tradition and culture. Furthermore the narrative structure of the
body displays a natural afﬁnity with sacred text inasmuch as both are
grounded in temporality. The sacred text emerges out of tradition,
which constantly reconﬁgures its narrative through history, and the
body in tradition is formed in accordance with this temporality. As
I have argued, the narrative of the body is the formation of subjec-
tive coherence through the linking of the indexicality of the subject
with that of the ‘text’, an argument that can be fully illustrated as
regards the tantric body.
   If the ﬁrst problem with the genealogists’ account is their nar-
rative constructionist position and the rejection of a narrative
structure inherent in the body, a second related problem is that the
only historical telos of the body, on this account, has been the will
to power. This view is generally at odds with scriptural traditions
which maintain, on the contrary, that the narrative structure of the
body is teleological in aspiring to some human good beyond the
political inscription of power. With regard to the tantric body, while a
genealogical-type analysis might reveal the ways in which the tantric
body is linked to traditional power structures, to the cult of the king
for example, we need to accept the claims of tradition concerning the
transcendent goals of the tantric body as having a legitimacy that can
be challenged only on a priori grounds. The goods of tradition are
fundamentally opposed to a genealogical analysis of late modernity
whose goal is ultimately the analysis of power in tradition in order
to dissolve that power.
                       The Tantric Body

                  Experience and Asceticism

When speaking about the body the problem of experience must
inevitably be addressed. On the one hand we have the body as
representation, as symbolic system that encodes a culture’s ideas
and practices; yet on the other we have the reality of the lived body,
that we ‘experience’ worlds through the senses and body and that
for human beings this is our primary mode of functioning (there
may be others such as dream or trance states in which there is no
awareness of the physical body). Yet we must be cautious of the
term ‘experience’, especially in relation to religion, for its meaning
is extremely opaque, and while the English word has a resonance in
contemporary culture in that it legitimises particular ways of thinking
and behaving, its universal applicability in an unexamined form must
be brought into question.
   An important current in modern Western thinking about religion,
probably stemming from Schleiermacher, who understood religion
as a feeling of absolute dependence, and mediated through Otto, has
been to emphasise experience as being at the heart of religion. Indeed,
many have claimed that beyond differences of doctrine and practice
there is an experience common to diverse cultures and histories, and
that if we strip away this overlay we will discover a common core
experience, variously expressed as a sense of divinity, a sense of the
‘numinous’, of merging into an ocean of joy, as becoming one with
the divine, and so on. Diverse religions are different paths to the
same goal of a uniﬁed mystical experience. This has been called the
‘common core’ theory of mystical experience, or, to use Huxley’s
phrase, ‘the perennial philosophy’ view.73 Others, such as Steven
Katz, offered strong refutations of this view, claiming that mystical
experiences are tradition-speciﬁc, strongly linked to language and
the linguistic construction of the world.74 There is no space here to
review this literature and assess the arguments, but the argument I
present is clearly sympathetic to the critique of perennial philosophy,
yet would not wish to dismiss all claims to universality. The Katz
position, standing at the beginning of the linguistic turn, high-
lighted the importance of language in the formation of experience.
Language and experience are mutually implicated, as there are no
                         The Body as Text                            

pre-linguistic epistemic givens in this view. All cultural forms are
pervaded by language, and we need to know a lot before engaging
in the practices of religion, practices that involve sustained learning
and internalising of tradition. Inhabiting a religious tradition is more
like learning a skill than acknowledging propositions. I think this
needs to be complemented by the idea that it is not only language
but also somatic patterns of narrative and the enactment of traditions
that are deeply formative of experience, and indeed that all human
experience is within those boundaries. The anthropologist of Nepal
Robert Desjarlais, for example, describes his own trance states as
being parallel to those of his Nepali informants, yet these experiences,
his own ‘shamanic visions’, are regarded by those informants as
being ‘culturally irrelevant’.75 Experience is meaningful only within a
cultural narrative and the complexity of experience created within the
complexity of the interlocking cultural narratives that we inhabit.
   If we understand ‘experience’ not as a timeless mode outside
of language and conception, but as a way of speaking about the
narrative of a human life, as Oliver Davies does,76 then the term
has relevance, especially when speaking about the body. There is an
argument for the resurrection of experience in a new mode. Indeed,
experience in this sense is integral to the body as a way of being in
the world, what Csordas has usefully called ‘embodiment’, a central
feature of such embodiment being its indeterminacy.77 The body
is the precondition for experience and at this level functions in a
precognitive way. The body as experience, as lived body, is arguably
a precognitive condition for all cultural and religious expression.
Drawing on the work of Merleau-Ponty, Drew Leder argues that
the body is experienced as an absence, the disappearance of the body
from our awareness while yet functioning as the precondition for
awareness.78 Such disappearance from awareness of the lived body
is linked to the body as representation in that representations of
the body into which we are habituated become inseparable from our
experience. There is a reciprocation between the body as lived and
the body as pre-cognitive experience: the experience of the body is
fundamentally constrained by the body as symbolic order, and the
symbolic order of the body only comes to life because experienced,
and this can be at a deep level in a non-cognitive way. To refer
                       The Tantric Body

ahead somewhat, the experience of oneself as being identical with
the supreme deity ˆiva is an internalisation of the ˆaiva symbolic
order such that subjectivity is engulfed or overwhelmed by the ex-
perience of ˆiva. The body as symbolic system for ordering the
cosmos becomes an existential location for a subjectivity expanded
to a tradition-constrained limit. That is, the practitioner achieves a
corporeal understanding of the vibrant goal.
    In the context of religion, rather than a pristine ‘experience’
expressed and approached in different ways, we need a much more
nuanced argument in which the body is seen in terms of text and
the subjective appropriation of tradition. The narrative of the prac-
titioner’s life conforms to the narrative of tradition and the body
is encoded in text-speciﬁc ways. This encoding, this mapping of
tradition on to the body, is also the experience of tradition and the
fusion of the lived body with the symbolic order of the tradition.
Another way of saying this is that the extra-textual subject, what
is called the indexical-I, is ﬁlled out with tradition and text-speciﬁc
content and that this is indeed ‘experience’.
    In an important book on Tibetan Buddhism, Civilized Shamans,
Geoffrey Samuel has argued for a distinction between shamanic and
clerical Buddhism, where ‘shamanic’ refers to ‘the regulation and
transformation of human life and human society through the use
(or purported use) of alternate states of consciousness by means of
which specialist practitioners are held to communicate with a mode of
reality alternative to, and more fundamental than, the world of every-
day experience.’79 On the one hand we have the practitioner focused
on somatic experience in contrast to the monk–scholar concerned
with monastic discipline and philosophy. In the context of Hindu
Tantrism the shamanic practitioner might be seen in the t®ntrika
cremation ground ascetic seeking ecstatic experience through yogic
techniques, ecstatic sexuality and intoxicating substances in contrast
to the tantric Brahman temple priest or practitioner still within the
sphere of orthoprax injunction. This distinction could be reﬂected in
the distinction between the s®dhaka, the practitioner desiring pleasure
and power in higher worlds (bubhuk◊u), and the ®c®rya, the teacher
desiring liberation (mumuk◊u). However, the argument of this book
is that both ecstatic and formalised Tantrism must be understood
                         The Body as Text                            

as the encoding of the body with the text. The tradition forms the
body of both ‘ecstatic’ and ‘formal’ practitioner and neither idea can
be understood outside of a textual revelatory tradition.
   In the following pages we will see how the entextualisation of the
body operates in the tantric traditions in terms of the identiﬁcation
of embodied self with that assumed in the texts, in terms of reading,
and above all in ritual and asceticism. In ritual, tradition and text
are mapped on to the body through a series of procedures such that
the body becomes divinised. In a parallel way this process occurs in
what might be called asceticism, where through ascetic practices the
practitioner inhabits worlds given in the texts of tradition. Through
ritual and ascetic practices, the tantric adept seeks to expand his sub-
jectivity such that he experiences different worlds within the system
until he attains liberation, which is understood as the divinisation
of self and body. Implicit here is an understanding of ritual as a
form through which culture is replicated, that enacts cultural values,
and embodies the memory of tradition. Rituals are systems of signs
that establish a continuity of identity and through non-identical
repetition.80 The lived body and the symbolic representation of it
merge together. This merging of symbolic representation and lived,
experienced body is a corporeal understanding of text. A corporeal
understanding of the text is a way of inhabiting the text linked to a
‘religious reading’ rather than a non-corporeal ‘consumerist’ reading,
to draw on a distinction by Paul Grifﬁths,81 although in contrast
to Grifﬁths what constitutes religious reading is not the quality of
attention but the indwelling of the subject in the text and the text
in the subject. This book clearly does not itself represent a corporeal
understanding, but does bear witness to such an understanding in
the tantric case and claims that such corporeal understanding is
always, illimitably, textual.


                  The Argument of the Book

The book is divided into two parts. Part I, ‘Theory, Text and
History’, outlines the argument and describes the tantric texts and
traditions I shall be concerned with in their historical context. In
                       The Tantric Body

Part II, I show by some detailed examples how the body is inscribed
and the self mapped by the texts within a diversity of metaphysical
viewpoints. Some tantric traditions are dualistic in maintaining an
eternal distinction between the true self, a transcendent God, and
the world, while others are monistic in maintaining their ultimate
identity. While some texts are synthetic in claiming that ritual can be
done according to a variety of texts or that rituals from one group
can be absorbed by another, as Granoff has shown,82 other texts
are clear that ritual must be performed according to the procedures
outlined in a speciﬁc scripture. The Raurav®gama, for example,
explicitly says that rites being performed prescribed by one Tantra
should not be mixed with rites from another. Mixing texts in ritual
is harmful to the king and kingdom.83
   In spite of this diversity, the desire for traditions to distance
themselves from each other and their often rigorous argument, the
divinisation of the body is a theme and process shared by differ-
ent traditions. The body becomes the uniting metaphor of these
systems and processes at the level of practice and demonstrates a
shared substrate of ritual and cosmology in spite of divergent meta-
physical claims. In particular, I would wish to identify two processes
or fundamental principles (which are also themselves metaphors) that
form the tantric body. The ﬁrst is a hierarchical and emanationist
cosmology in which lower levels emerge from higher: a movement
from the reﬁned and pure to the coagulated and impure, from re-
ﬁned matter to physicality. In the second, the body recapitulates this
hierarchical cosmos; the body becomes a cosmography, a writing of
the cosmos. The structure of the body reﬂects the structure of the
cosmos and is itself thought to be an emanation from a higher level.
What follows from these two fundamental principles articulated in
our texts is: (a) to achieve salvation is to trace a route back through
the cosmos to its divine source or the point at which the disembodied
self became entangled with matter, which is also conceptualised as
a journey through the body; (b) this pathway back to the source is
the mapping of the body in tradition-speciﬁc and text-speciﬁc ways
through ritual and interior practice. This is the entextualisation of
the body, which we can also speak of in terms of subjectivity having
variable linguistic agency in which the boundaries of the subject of
                         The Body as Text                           

speech change through the internalisation of text. Thus, for exam-
ple, the tantric tradition focused on the god Vi◊n. u (the P®ñcar®tra)
envisions the universe in terms of three broad categories: the pure
creation, the mixed creation and the impure creation. The mixed
is an emanation from the pure, and the impure an emanation from
the mixed through God’s power or energy. ‘Pure’ means devoid of
physicality and ‘pollution’, which are features of impure creation.
The goal of life, on this account, is to progress through the levels of
the cosmos from the impure to the pure, a journey which is reﬂected
in the body; the body becomes an image or icon84 of the universe
and the structure of one is recapitulated in the other. Much of the
present book will be an illustration of this fundamental concept.
   The consequences of this argument in terms of the history of
ideas are ﬁrst that the tantric body entails an emanationist cosmology
which is implicitly (and sometimes explicitly) pluralistic. Rather
than monism, often associated with the Indian religion, the tantric
traditions inherit the ancient systems of speculative thinking that we
can refer to as S®m. khya. Second, developed metaphysical interpre-
tations of an idealistic nature about the unity of consciousness are
a later, secondary overlay on to the basic ritual and cosmological
structure, evidence that supports Sanderson’s view about these texts.
Indeed, metaphysical speculation sits on top, as it were, of a ritual
substrate and we have what Beyer has called, in a Buddhist context,
the ‘ritualisation of metaphysics’.85 Third, tantric traditions must be
seen not as being generated out of a non-dual, spontaneous religious
experience which takes on different cultural and doctrinal forms, but
as developments of ancient traditions of speculation and practice
closely linked to Brahmanical imagination, vedic practice and insti-
tutions. Along with ritual, the tantric imaginaire is less concerned
with the usual activities of Indian philosophical discourse, namely
epistemology and logic, and more concerned with a poetics of im-
agination and aesthetics articulated in texts and commented upon
by a second-order discourse within the tradition. There is thus a
devotional or bhakti dimension to many tantric textual traditions.86
Fourth, the politicising of the tantric body means that traditional
power relationships are maintained in the wider social body. The
tantric body is a pre-modern, ‘conservative’ body that conforms to
                       The Tantric Body

the structure of tradition and conﬁrms the matrix of social power
even in its ritualised ﬂaunting of it.
   In the following pages I intend to illustrate and develop the argu-
ment of the textual inscribing of the body and its linguistic agency.
The tantric body cannot be understood without some account of
the vedic body, and the next chapter gives an account of different
historical discourses, namely legal, political, and philosophical, that
have contributed to formation of the tantric body either positively
by being appropriated or negatively by being rejected. Part II devel-
ops the argument of body as text with detailed examples from the
P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva traditions. Here we shall include an account
of the breaking of vedic prohibitions in caste-free sexual ritual of
ecstatic Tantra intended to realise the goal of uprooting desire. We
examine in more general terms the tantric ‘imagination’, showing
how the body becoming divine is the central trope of Tantrism:
entextualisation is a topos operative from the king to the village
washerwoman. An appendix offers a translation of the divinisation
of the body through ny®sa from the Jay®khya-sam. hit®, which has
provided much illustration of the tantric body in this book.
                                

                       The Vedic Body




A       characteristic of scriptural religious traditions is
      the ability to recognise in the past what could be and what could
not be a guide for the future and the ability to identify resources
in the past necessary for the construction of the future.1 Although
‘new’ in the early centuries of the common era, the tantric traditions
nevertheless had a sense of themselves as having a continuity with the
past, of being traditions, a sense of receiving something handed down
and passed on. Indeed, this heritage is of central importance in the
formation of the tantric traditions, which can only be understood in
relation to it. The tantric traditions are the inheritors of systems of
thought and techniques of the body whose origins lie in the ancient
past and which had achieved a high degree of reﬂexive awareness
at the time of the emergence of the tantric systems. In order to
understand the tantric body we must offer some account of what we
might call the vedic body. These abstractions, the ‘vedic body’ and
the ‘tantric body’, are intended simply to be a condensed shorthand
for representations and techniques of the body in what might broadly
be called the vedic and tantric traditions. Both bodies function as
symbolic systems and metaphors through which the social world and
wider universe are conceptualised; both bodies are the product of
deeper cultural forces and structures of power; and both bodies were
also the lived bodies of practitioners in the traditions, the existential
                       The Tantric Body

modes by which human beings inhabited their world. The vedic
body is a vast topic in itself, but for our purposes we need to focus
on important dimensions of Brahmanical discourse that affected the
practices of being a Brahman, that affected the techniques of the
vedic, Brahmanical body. Brahmanical representations of the body
are closely related to different realms of value in the Brahmanical
universe and different conceptions of the good for an individual and
community. These values are articulated in different genres of text
and we shall here focus on legal discourse, political discourse, and
a philosophical discourse concerned with the highest good. All of
these impact upon the tantric conception of the body and practices
either through being absorbed by the tantric traditions or through
their rejection. Apart from legal, political and philosophical discourse
about the body, there are also two further areas of discussion and
practice that have a direct bearing, namely medicine and an erotics
that interfaces with aesthetics. But ﬁrst we need to offer a brief
description of the political and social context within which vedic
and later tantric discourse emerged.


               The Political and Social Context

As Sanderson has observed, by the early medieval period Brahmanical
traditions of thinking and practice (and such systems were only
Brahmanical) were mutually aware of each other2 and deﬁned their
boundaries in response to each other’s philosophical positions, often
arranging these views in a graded hierarchy. Some schools accepted
the Veda as revelation, regarding it to be the source of their tradi-
tion; others rejected them. In philosophy we see the development of
exegesis with the M¬m®m. s® tradition, various forms of monism in
Ved®nta, particularly the Advaita tradition developing from ˆam. kara
(– ), to later Vai◊n. ava forms, the dualism of S®mkhya,
the heterodox systems of the Buddhists and Jains, along with the
development of the tantric traditions. The philosophical positions of
many schools also express traditions of practice and the doctrines of
wider communities which arose within particular social and political
contexts.
                          The Vedic Body                             

    The problem with the history of India is that it has so often been
difﬁcult to date texts and to place philosophical texts in a social his-
tory, but this becomes easier once we enter the ﬁrst millennium .
While the early medieval period saw the mutual clariﬁcation of philo-
sophical positions, it also witnessed much political turbulence. The
comparative political stability of the Gupta and V®k®ﬂaka empires
(c. – ) was replaced by a period of some complexity, with
different kingdoms and tribal lords coming to political dominance
and then passing away. In historically locating the social history of
tantric Buddhism, Davidson has laid out the political developments
from around  to   in a meticulous and clear way, making
the point that while this period has been neglected by historians
– often because the post-Gupta period was associated with decline
and decay – the empires of the Gurjara-Prat¬h®ras (c. – )
and the P®las (c. –) lasted longer than the Guptas.3 With
the destruction of the Guptas and V®k®ﬂakas there is increasing
decentralisation, with an emphasis on the region and a rise in the
status and concept of kingship. Echoing the ideal of a previous age,
the early medieval period witnessed the rise of the ideology of the
‘universal ruler’ (cakrav®rtin) and the strengthening of the court as
the locus of cultural activity, such as the development of schools
of Sanskrit poetry and drama. Alongside the development of the
region, Davidson shows how the king becomes divinised and in the
new feudal kingdoms divine; royal power is expressed in the regional
temples, which ‘became showpieces of royal self-representation’.4
    These kingdoms formed a complex network, which Inden has
called an ‘imperial formation’ and Stein has called a ‘segmentary
state’, in which a ritual hegemony operated where a lesser king or
tribal lord would pay ritual obeisance and taxes to a more powerful
king, as in the case of the Cola state.5 This model would seem to
have been operative at least up to the period of the Vijayanagara
empire (–sixteenth century) in which the king would on the
occasion of the Navaratri Festival receive ritual obeisance, deriving
his power from the Goddess herself.6 It would seem that the model
of kingship promoted in Kautilya’s Artha˜®stra, which was composed
some time during the ﬁrst few centuries of the common era, had
some currency and reﬂected the practices of belligerent kings who
                       The Tantric Body

waged war on their neighbours while attempting alliances beyond
them on the principle that one’s enemy’s enemy is one’s ally.
   During this period, different religious groups fared differently at
different times. The Buddhists were successful in India up to a point,
with large, elaborate monastic institutions such as Nalanda becoming
wealthy and attracting royal patronage. The ˆaiva P®˜upata tradition,
a renunciate order that rivalled the Buddhists, seems to have become
highly successful, attracting royal patronage, as Davidson documents,
and becoming associated with royal temple construction in the sev-
enth to tenth centuries.7 The P®˜upatas were in control of the famous
and wealthy temple at Somanath, for example, before its ransacking
by Mahmud of Ghazni in .8 Indeed, Mahmud of Ghazni had
previously plundered the Kashmir valley in  , presaging a
destruction of ‘Hindu’, especially tantric, discourse in the years that
followed with the advent of Muslim rule. As Dyczkowski observes,
the consolidation of Muslim rule in north India witnesses, and is
partly responsible for, the disappearance of tantric traditions. §gamic
ˆaivism retreated to the south, where it survives in Tamil Nadu,
and a tantric tradition also continues in Kerala. Similarly the tantric
cult of the Goddess Kubjik® retreated and was given royal protection
in Nepal.9 As a result of these historical developments, namely the
Muslim conquest, there are very few tantric manuscript sources from
northern India, outside of Nepal. Indeed, the tantric tradition in the
north more or less completely disappeared, although after the ˆaiva
Tantras or ®gamas there was a second, later development focused
on the Goddess or ˆakti rather than ˆiva, which became especially
important in Bengal.
   It is not unreasonable to suppose that the political structure that
developed had some impact on the conceptual schemes, images and
practices of different traditions. As the kings had become gods,
the gods became like kings and the royal court became the model
for the gods’ court in the heavens. Cosmology, so central in the
religions of India as a hierarchy of worlds, comes to resemble the
social and political hierarchies of the wider social order, and those
hierarchies come to resemble the Hindu cosmos: a social order in
which everything had its place with a high degree of deference,
and which was believed to reﬂect the natural order. But while the
                          The Vedic Body                             

religious traditions developed in this highly politicised context, and
it is important to locate traditions within social and political history
where possible, this alone is not enough to explain or understand
them. Tradition cannot be reduced to its political environment, and
the meaning and signiﬁcance of a textual history cannot be explicated
in terms of social and political history, for the meanings of texts with
semiotic density exceed social and cultural particularities and are
reconstituted in traditions re-imagined throughout history. The ques-
tion is open concerning the extent to which the political conditions
that favoured ˆaivism in Kashmir in the late tenth century, royal
patronage being a key factor in its dissemination, impacted upon the
forms of interiority promoted by the tantras. Indeed, traditions of
textual transmission and commentary are fairly oblivious to external
political forces, as Halbfass has observed with regard to Brahmanical
representation of the ‘foreigner’,10 and traditions have often shown
remarkable resilience to erosion by external, political forces. The
famous ˆaiva philosopher Abhinavagupta had royal patronage and
his non-dual doctrine was highly inﬂuential in courtly circles, but
one suspects that part of this success was the appeal of the tradition
itself and the forms of inwardness is promoted. Abhinavagupta’s
Tantr®loka reﬂects a rich tradition – or range of traditions – that
became successful not simply due to reasons of political patronage,
but because the content of the teachings had resonance among an
educated Brahmanical elite. Scripture and tradition have an internal
coherence or structure of meaning that operates with varying degrees
of success outside of particular political and historical circumstances:
a coherence which itself partly accounts for the survival potential
of any one tradition.
    In studying the history of ideas in India we are mainly studying
the self-representations of the educated, Brahmanical class who
composed the treatises and guarded the transmission of tradition
through the generations. Within the vedic tradition the Brahmans
were concerned with establishing and maintaining their position
as the upholders of moral virtue and social order, namely dharma.
Taking our cue once again from MacIntyre (although in a very
different context) we might claim that scriptural traditions focus
on three areas.11 First, there is a concern with the body as a marker
                        The Tantric Body

of personal identity. Throughout the history of Indian society (and
arguably of all human societies) the body is a sign of social location.
The subject of ﬁrst-person predicates not only has but is a body for
the traditional Brahmanical community within the sphere of vedic
teaching; a body that marks a person as belonging to a particular
endogamous social grouping or caste, the property of the body one
is born with.12 While some tantric traditions believed that initiation
could eliminate caste, the body nevertheless remains an index of
social identity through the marks of one’s cult, one’s gender and
one’s practices. Second, there is a concern with agency. Part of
belonging to a community and tradition is being able to account for
one’s thoughts and behaviour to others. Although this is complicated
by questions of reincarnation and karma for the broad vedic tradi-
tion (which does not unequivocally accept the doctrine of sam. s®ra),
people have moral and legal responsibility to uphold the values of
the social order. For Brahmans this meant above all upholding the
rules of ritual purity, but it also meant legal obligations on all strata
of society, including the king. Third, the life of the body/self must
be seen in terms of a quest.
    That life is limited by birth and death is clearly recognised in the
vedic tradition with its emphases on the construction of a person
through rites of passage (sam. sk®ras) and in the sense in the philo-
sophical traditions that there is a continuity beyond life and that what
preceded a particular life has a bearing and constraining inﬂuence
upon it. In MacIntyre’s phrasing, ‘my life has the continuity and
unity of a quest, a quest whose object is to discover that truth about
my life as a whole which is an indispensable part of the good of
that life.’13 Although MacIntyre is writing about a very different
tradition, his statement holds true for the vedic tradition. Indeed,
the Brahmanical tradition thematised the narrative dimension of
life and claimed that three and later four goods were crucial to it,
namely the values of social responsibility (dharma); material, politi-
cal and symbolic prosperity or success (artha); and pleasure (k®ma)
within the boundaries of social responsibility. Later the fourth goal
of salvation or liberation (mok◊a) as an ultimate goal or good for a
life was added to the list.14 Of course, the goods of a life in its nar-
rative course are inseparable from the personal identity of the body
                          The Vedic Body                            

and the agency assumed to achieve those goals. The Brahmanical
discourses and prescriptions for social-identity-forming practices, for
technologies of the body, can be roughly mapped on to these goals.
By the early medieval period, rich textual traditions had developed
loosely connected to the goals of dharma, artha and k®ma, namely
legal material (dharma-˜®stra), political discourse (artha-˜®stra) and
erotics (k®ma-˜®stra). All these discourses have something to say
about the vedic body, although not necessarily in agreement, and
the tantric body must be seen in the light of these formations.
The tantric traditions are informed by Brahmanical discourse, not
least in their rejection of it. The Tantras and their concerns can in
many ways be understood as a response to Brahmanical ‘legalism’
and the sexualised ritual of some tantric traditions as being quite
distinct from the erotic discourse of the k®ma-˜®stra. The tantric
traditions, as we shall see, accept the narrative of life as a journey
but reinterpret or even reject the vedic conﬁguring of this journey.
They often reject that the goal and ultimate good must be deter-
mined within the boundaries of vedic social values and break the
link between the highest good for a life and an identity determined
by brahmanical discourse and power. Rather than a person’s high-
est good being found within the vedic tradition, on the contrary it
must be located outside of that tradition in sets of values that are
supplementary to the vedic, or, in more extreme traditions, reverse
them. Indeed, many tantric representations of the body serve to
disrupt that sense of vedic identity, as we shall see. To gain some
leverage on representations of the vedic body linked to the scheme
of values, we need to examine legal discourse, political discourse,
and a philosophical discourse about the self.


                         Legal Discourse

Brahmanical understandings of bodily identity, agency and goal are
articulated in legal texts and commentary upon them. The legal
treatises technically known as smr. ti, ‘remembered tradition’ that
can be responsibly rendered as ‘secondary revelation’. The earliest
is the famous Laws of Manu (Manusmr. ti) composed some time
                       The Tantric Body

between the second century  and the second century ; and
the Yajñavalkyasmr. ti composed probably during the Gupta era are
the most important texts in the sense that they both have ‘a stream
of commentators’15 and formed the basis of jurisprudence in later
colonial India, although they go beyond simply legal concerns.16 In
some ways they might be seen as the very opposite of the Tantras,
although a later text, the Mah®nirv®n. a-tantra contains legal material
derived from British law, making the text a ‘juridical hoax’ composed
no earlier than the mid eighteenth century.17
    Dharma˜®stra comprises texts that are legal treatises in a very
wide sense, for they include material on daily puriﬁcation practices,
rites of passage, atonement for omitted rites and so on. Mainstream
tantric texts of the P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva Siddh®nta maintain a close
proximity to the vedic tradition and prescribe a whole way of life that
incorporates vedic rites of passage (birth, vedic initiation, marriage
and death) along with the supererogatory, tantric rites of their tra-
dition. They supplement vedic ideals with their own accounts of
the highest good for a life and while they claim to supersede vedic
views, they are nevertheless inﬂuenced by the dharma˜®stra, not
only in their incorporation of the general pattern of ritual life but
also in the use of terminology. As observed by Bühnemann, for
example, in relation to the Kul®rn. ava-tantra, impurities that arise
at the beginning and end of mantra recitation need to be removed.
In analogy to the dharma˜®stra the text refers to these impurities as
j®takas‚taka and mr. takas‚taka, pollutions that need to be puriﬁed
in connection with birth and death.18 The Jay®khyasam. hit® also
refers to this puriﬁcation in relation to expiation for omitted rites
(praya˜citta).19
    The general view of the body promoted in dharmic literature
is ambivalent. On the one hand great care is taken over the body,
a guarding and control of the body’s functions in accordance with
highest moral duty (parama dharma) for a life; on the other the body
is the location of the passions and is inherently impure through its
desires, instincts and efﬂuvia. Not only this, in most philosophical
systems, which are generally addressed to male adherents, the body’s
sexuality is itself a distraction from the path of liberating knowledge.
As Doniger discusses, the understanding of the body as impure,
                          The Vedic Body                             

along with a distrust of desire, is linked to a radical misogyny in
ancient Brahmanical culture and male anxiety in the face of the
female body and sexuality.20 This anti-body rhetoric generally takes
the form of listing body parts and functions and drawing the reader’s
attention to each with a view to highlighting a repulsion generated
in this kind of objectiﬁcation. Roberts insightfully observes that
this ‘semiotic deconstruction of the body and its organs is the price
paid for the tolerable cultural management of sexuality’21 and it is
clearly the case that negative representations of the body are linked
to negative views of sexuality and often to a misogyny that identiﬁes
women with the body. An example of the objectiﬁcation of the body
in Manu, discussed by Doniger, is as follows:

  [A man] should abandon this foul-smelling, tormented, impermanent
  dwelling-place of living beings, ﬁlled with urine and excrement,
  pervaded by old age and sorrow, infested by illness, and polluted by
  passion, with bones for beams, sinews for cords, ﬂesh and blood for
  plaster, and skin for the roof.22

   This passage occurs in the context of a discussion about the circle
of reincarnation (sam. s®ra), which one who does not have a vision
of the supreme self or absolute (param®tma-dar˜ana) will re-enter
again and again.
   Yet while there are undoubtedly passages such as this that at
the plain sense level of the text present an extremely negative at-
titude towards the body, this cannot be taken as a sign tout court of
Brahmanical attitudes. The picture is more nuanced and complex.
According to the commentator Bh®ruci, we must understand the
passage in the context of a discussion about the dharma of the
renunciate (pravrajita) or ascetic (t®pasa) whose meditation practice
gradually allows a detachment (vairagya) from the body to this higher
vision.23 This negative representation of the body occurs in the
context, according to Bh®ruci, of the particular good or value (vi˜e◊a
dharma) of the renunciate who seeks to transcend the social order
in the stages on life’s way beyond that of student and householder.
The renouncer who seeks liberation has gone beyond the world of
social transaction and legal responsibility24 and seeks to go beyond
the body in a ‘spiritual’ (®tmaka) liberation. Although renunciation is
                          The Tantric Body

excluded from the householder, it is still within the overarching, total
scheme of the orthodox, Brahmanical world-view, and in a sense is
included by its exclusion. Even the rejection of householder values
is incorporated into Brahmanical representations.
    While the body of the renunciate is seen by Manu in the negative
terms described above, the body of the student and householder is
represented not in such stark terms, but in terms of the need for its
control and puriﬁcation. The householder and student operate by
a different set of values to the renouncer, those of moral and legal
responsibility to the wider social body, which are different in not
displaying disgust for particular body parts or functions, but rather
displaying a need to control the body through rigorous puriﬁcation.25
The body is the vehicle for a successful life, but only through its
strict control and avoidance of impurity and spontaneous desire.
Some of the rhetoric in Manu concerning the restraint of the senses
and body is derived from the general yogic discourse that control of
the senses leads to a higher knowledge. For example:
     A wise man should strive to restrain his organs which run wild among
     alluring sensual objects, like a charioteer restrains his horses. (Manu
     .)
     Desire is never extinguished by the enjoyment of desired objects; it
     only grows stronger like a ﬁre [fed] with ghee. ()
     But when one among all the organs slips away [from control] thereby
     wisdom slips away from him, like the water ﬂows through the one foot
     of a [water carrier’s] skin. ()

For the dharma˜®stra the body is not only subjected to rules of ritual
purity, but is the subject of legislation; an index of the whole society
that reﬂects social stability and the need to maintain caste boundaries,
thereby maintaining power relationships within the community. The
vedic body is a controlled body, a control that seeks to keep the body
under the sign of Brahmanical authority in formulating the limits of
legal transactions, such as inheritance law, and in seeking to control
actions from rising in the morning to elaborate rules for cleansing
procedures around bodily processes.26
   A large part of this process is the control of women’s bodies in
legal procedures and in discourse. Although the Hindu legal treatises
                          The Vedic Body                            

were probably the ﬁrst in human history to recognise women’s prop-
erty rights, by twenty-ﬁrst-century standards they are inevitably
open to critique. Generally women are subject to male authority
throughout dharmic literature. For example, there is a debate in the
dharma˜®stra about whether a widow should inherit her husband’s
property, some texts saying that she should inherit it totally, as the
wife is half of her husband’s body, and so as long as half of his
body lives, how could anyone else gain his property? Another set of
texts, however, supports the view that a man’s property should go
to his male relatives.27 The eleventh-century J¬m‚tav®hana suggests
a compromise, arguing that a widow should inherit if there are no
sons, although not be able to dispense with the property.28 Other
examples could be cited to illustrate the general Brahmanical idea
that women are subject to male authority, to father as a daughter,
to husband as a wife, and to son as a mother.29 Indeed, according to
Manu woman is the ﬁeld (k◊etra) in which the man sows his seed to
produce (ideally male) offspring.30
   The vedic body is thus inscribed with vedic values through the
ritual processes of rites of passage through which it is constructed
(sam. sk®ra means ‘put together’), controlled through rules of ritual
purity, and controlled through legal procedures. Both men and
women are subject to these controls in ways which go against con-
temporary Western values, but which were also challenged at the
time of their predominance by both renunciate traditions and by the
tantric traditions. The Brahmanical control of the body was rejected
in many cases by the Tantras and their followers, sometimes in a mild
way through their subversion by overwriting the vedic body with
tantric rites, sometimes in an overt way by its complete transgres-
sion in ecstatic bodily experience. While the discourse of women’s
bodies remains ambiguous in the tantric corpus (all texts so far as
we know were written by men), there is often an explicit rejection
of the Brahmanical control of the body and a reconstruction of it
in other ways, even in tantric traditions such as the ˆaiva Siddh®nta
that align themselves with the vedic tradition. The body is not simply
subject to control by purity laws and is not only the object of legal
transactions to maintain the social order, but rather the traditions of
the ‘left’ contain the potential for extreme, ecstatic, experience that
                       The Tantric Body

shatters vedic, conformist structures. But the spontaneous rupture of
the vedic body in any ecstatic Tantra is a spontaneity nurtured and
facilitated only within the speciﬁcity of tradition (see pp. –).


                        Political Discourse

Closely linked to legal (and moral) discourse is a political discourse
about the state and the nature of kingship, the r®ja-dharma. Although
integral to the dharma˜®stra itself (Manu, for example, contains
important sections on it) r®ja-dharma came to be treated in independ-
ent treatises,31 the most famous of which is Kautilya’s Artha˜®stra,
the ‘science of government’ (ﬁrst–second century ) concerned
with the two aspects of r®ja-dharma: the development of prosperity
(artha) deﬁned as education and riches32 and government deﬁned
as punishment of offenders (dan. ¥a) or, more broadly, the exercise
of law. Kautilya’s work is a theoretical discourse, deeply concerned
with the maintenance of power within the segmentary state and
the control of populations, not simply as a consequence of brute
political force, but because the control of the people by the king is
integral to the order of the cosmos, to dharma. Property rights are
ruthlessly maintained, including rights over women, through the
punishment and torture of thieves, and adulterous liaisons across
caste are punished by disﬁgurement or even death.33 Kautilya is keen
to point out the powers of the king to disﬁgure, maim and execute
for the maintenance of the social body, the upkeep of the segmented
hierarchy of the medieval Indian kingdom.
   As in medieval Europe, we have in the Indian material a link
between the state or the body of the kingdom and the body of the
king.34 According to Kautilya and others, the state (r®jya) is made
up of seven elements (sapt®n. ga): the ruler or sovereign, the minister,
the territory of the state itself (r®◊ﬂra), the fortiﬁed capital, wealth
in the treasury, the army and friends.35 These are called constituents
(prakr. ti) or limbs (an. ga), with the implication that they are the
limbs of the social body. While there are very few textual references
that directly compare the state to a body, one or two make this ex-
plicit connection. J¬v®nanda’s ˆukran¬tis®ra, a digest on governance,
                          The Vedic Body                             

compares the state and speciﬁcally these seven constituents to the
organs of the body: the king is the head, the ministers are the eyes,
the ally is the ear, the treasury the mouth, the army the mind, the
capital the hands, and the territory the feet.36 This idea of society as
a body, and by extension the kingdom, is quite ancient in India and
is common in modern popular discourse.37 The R. g-veda contains a
famous hymn to the cosmic man from whose sacriﬁce the cosmos is
formed, including the social order, with the Brahmans coming from
his mouth as the voice of society, the nobles from his arms as the
strength of society, the commoners from his thighs as the support,
and the serfs from his feet.38 For the body to function all elements
must work together in harmony, although according to Manu each
one is superior to the preceding. Manu compares these limbs to the
senses (indriya) restricted to their own domains (vi◊aya),39 thereby
highlighting the conception of the state as a body. Manu’s commenta-
tor Bh®ruci observes that a vice (vyasana) in any of this group is
likely to destroy the policies of the kingdom, so the king’s function
is to maintain the health of the social body through the exercise of
power in accordance with dharma.
    The social body is identiﬁed with the body of the king. Kautilya
says that the sum total of the constituents of the kingdom is the
king and that which he governs.40 Indeed, because of this link, the
moral virtues of the king have a direct impact upon the kingdom
and there is a correspondence between the body of the king and
his kingdom. Through controlling his senses and behaving like a
kingly sage (r®j®r◊i) by eliminating the vices of lust, anger, greed,
pride, arrogance and excitability, the king will succeed in a long and
prosperous rule.41 The body of the king reﬂects the body of the
kingdom and vice versa. Furthermore, the king is identiﬁed with
a deity or deities. Manu, for example, says that the king comprises
fragments of the gods42 and so there is a correspondence between the
bodies of the deities, the king and the kingdom. Given this intimate
connection, it is no wonder that some thinkers in medieval India,
notably Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa, thought that royal interest in extreme tantric
practices would have a detrimental effect on the kingdom. If the king
goes against dharma, deﬁned in terms of orthodox, Brahmanical
practice, then all the people will suffer because of the connection
                       The Tantric Body

between the two bodies, although, in spite of the identiﬁcation of
the king with the divinity, the law books do advocate the forcible
removal of a bad king ‘like a dog afﬂicted with madness’.43
   We have seen in the dharma˜®stra that the ambivalence towards
the body lies not in its rejection, but in the need for the body to be
controlled and restricted within the value system of dharma. Even,
or perhaps especially, the king’s body was not exempt. The body is
good in so far as it is a means of purifying the self and keeping the
dictates of tradition and probity, but bad in that if left uncontrolled
it will turn towards vice and the kingdom will suffer. All bodies are
interconnected in this world and the higher the status of the body
the wider the consequences of action. Marriott is surely correct
here in emphasising the transactional nature of personhood.44 An
outcaste (can. ¥®la) living beyond the cremation ground with ‘heretics’
(p®◊an. ¥a)45 is far less consequential than the high-caste member of
the social body. In one sense, the higher the degree of ritual purity to
be maintained, the more the social restriction, and the more damage
done to the social body in transgression.
   This presentation of the body and its function within the wider
culture assumes the validity of the distinction, highlighted by
Dumont, between purity and impurity, qualities, and indeed values,
reﬂected in the ritual construction of the body and its gendered role.
It is, of course, very difﬁcult to access the social reality of ancient
and medieval India other than in its representations, often ideal,
such as Kautilya’s text. Although Dumont has been criticised,46
that the purity–impurity (˜auca–a˜auca) distinction is historically
valid would seem to be the case from explicit textual references
concerning it. While the whole complex web of Indian social history
cannot be reduced to this basic division, which itself must be seen
in the context of power and social classes vying for position, it is
nevertheless of fundamental importance in understanding the vedic
body and, as we will see, the tantric body. Other cultural dynamics
have been identiﬁed in the social ﬁeld, especially the auspicious and
inauspicious by Marglin47 and the importance and loaded nature of
prestations by Raheja,48 a discussion of which would take us too far
from our topic. But it is important to remember that in dealing with
the textual history of ideas we are dealing with representations and
                          The Vedic Body                            

the ways in which different groups, mostly of Brahmans, wished
to present themselves to their community of readers. An important
representation was of the body controlled by purity and impurity
and the social body that reﬂected this distinction. In medieval India
Brahmanical men and women were severely constrained by the en-
dogamous group they were born into. One way to escape some of
these constraints, and to take on new constraints, was through the
institution of renunciation, the formal seeking of the highest good,
the goal of liberation from the body and social world to a goal deﬁned
in various ways by different traditions of renunciation.


                        The Highest Good

While the rather artiﬁcial scheme of the human goals, the puru◊®rthas,
has the disadvantage of the oversimpliﬁcation of competing values
available within the social body, it is signiﬁcant for the very fact of
attempting, fairly successfully, to integrate them into a coherent
scheme. The world-afﬁrming values of social responsibility, success
and pleasure have sometimes been contrasted with the world-denying
value of liberation from the world. That these two realms of value
exist and are held together does not reﬂect a contradiction but
does reﬂect a tension in the history of Hindu traditions that is
a characteristic of them. It not simply a matter of history that a
dominant social group, the Brahmans, that maintained one group of
values came to integrate another, contradictory, value. While there
is evidence for this in the sense that the three goods of dharma,
artha and k®ma as a coherent group are earlier than the four which
adds mok◊a, the tension between the positive afﬁrmation of social
values that emphasises duty, success and pleasure, along with their
negation in renunciation, has been there from extremely early on in
the tradition. The Upani◊ads, which reﬂect this tension, are certainly
being composed by  .49 We must resist any oversimpliﬁcation
of contrasting a world-afﬁrming arena of vedic values with a world-
negating arena of non-vedic values, in favour of a more complex
picture of historical development in which the tradition draws life
from the tension. On the one hand there are claims that what is
                        The Tantric Body

most important in the world is power or pleasure, while on the other
there are claims that liberation transcends all worldly values.50 The
tension is seen in Manu, which advocates the importance of dharma
and Brahmans fulﬁlling their social obligations, yet also looks to the
transcendent goal of liberation.
    The tension between competing goods in the Brahmanical tradi-
tion is partially resolved through the institution of the ‘stages of life’
(®˜rama) in which the householder can pursue the goods of social
obligation, success and pleasure, leaving the world-transcending lib-
eration to the renouncer. This is clearly an affective strategy within
the tradition, but one that is not wholly satisfactory to many within
it, and some texts, rather than encourage a disjunction between
competing goods, try to integrate them. The famous Bhagavad-g¬t®
is an example of this. Here the god Kr. ◊n. a advocates the necessity of
doing one’s social and moral duty, yet at the same time claims that
there can be liberation from the world of action through acting with
detachment from its fruits (asakta karma).51 The goods of worldly
morality and a world-shattering transcendence are placed side by
side, and the human condition exempliﬁed by Arjuna is to struggle
with the tension.
    The vedic body, then, is inscribed by a number of discourses and
traditions that the tantric traditions respond to. First, we have the
Brahmanical writing of the body in accordance with the highest social
good of correct action in accordance with scripture. This is a tradi-
tion of ritual that maintains the integrity of the body and the clear
differentiation of social and gendered roles that provides the basis
for all further speculation. Accompanying this level of ritual action
fundamental to the culture, we have a discourse about the nature of
ritual action as enjoined by scripture, namely the M¬m®m. s®, which
furthermore directly feeds in to a discourse about law, kingship,
and the nature of society as a whole. Second, we have at the level
of discourse a dualist metaphysics in the S®m. khya tradition, which
is more concerned with what it sees as the highest value of libera-
tion from the world. Third, we have a monistic metaphysics in the
Advaita Ved®nta that sees the highest goal as realisation of the self ’s
identity with a featureless, unbounded absolute reality. By the time
of the early medieval period and the rise of the tantric traditions,
                         The Vedic Body                           

the picture is more complex, with theistic traditions developing
discourses of transcendence, some of which attempt to integrate
this with the culture of Brahmanical ritualism. The tantric tradi-
tions emerge at a time when the cultural baseline of Brahmanical
orthopraxy, with its adherence to the values of caste and stage of
life (varn. ®˜rama-dharma), were strong yet becoming overlaid with
theistic systems of ritual and devotion (to Vi◊n. u and ˆiva). These
systems, along with competing discourses about the highest good,
are reﬂected in the tantric traditions and the tantric transformation
of the Brahmanical patterns.
                             

               The Tantric Revelation




W        from his prison cell in Kashmir some time during
        the closing years of the ninth century, the Ny®ya philosopher
Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa defended the authenticity of tantric revelation, but
within the boundaries of vedic reason. If the Tantras offer teachings
that are acceptable to learned people and if they do not go against
dharma, then he can see no reason why they should not be adopted.
However, if they proffer immoral teachings then the king should
certainly prohibit their continuance. This was indeed the case with
the sect of the blue clad (n¬l®mbara), who practised on festival
occasions, says Jayantha, unconstrained group sex in public places,
simply covered with a blue garment!1 For Jayantha such behav-
iour was against the public good and against the scriptures. While
Jayantha locates himself within the vedic tradition and espouses its
values, he is living in a time when the mainstream, orthodox and
orthoprax tradition is being challenged by unorthodox forms of
practice and texts that claim to be from a divine source. Jayantha
is clearly an intelligent and humorous man, deeply concerned about
social values and the possible threat to those values caused by new
ideas. He wrote his famous text of philosophy ‘The Bouquet of
Logic’ (Ny®yamañjari) in prison to keep himself amused (truly an
Indian Boethius!); in it he defends orthodox revelation, the Veda,
but is nevertheless open to the possibility of new revelation and
                      The Tantric Revelation                          

is a realist in understanding that his community needed to adapt
to the new challenge. But when that challenge threatened what
he saw as the fundamental values of his society, then he strongly
defended the old morality. Indeed, after his release from prison he
wrote a comic play, the §gama¥ambara, which Sanderson renders
as ‘Much Ado About Scripture’, highly critical of extreme tantric
ascetics in his country.2
   Jayantha’s writing shows a tension in early medieval Kashmir
between Brahmans who regarded the Veda as revelation that should
provide and govern values and others who were offering different
ways of life and thinking, such as the Buddhists, Jains and those who
were propagating different kinds of writing as revealed knowledge,
such as the t®ntrikas. Before proceeding to a fuller account of the
body as text in tantric traditions we need some discussion of what
the tantric tradition understood by ‘scripture’ or ‘revelation’ (tantra,
®gama) and how scripture related to other traditions of the time. It
is highly signiﬁcant that tantric traditions are scriptural. Like other
Indian religions, they take their doctrine and ritual from scripture
and formulate their goals wholly in conformity with the text. If the
vedic revelation provides, in Oberhammer’s terms, the authority for a
tradition passed down the generations (Überlieferungsautorität),3 then
so too do the Tantras. This is often overlooked or underestimated, for
to see tantric traditions as scriptural is to emphasise their traditional
and conservative nature, even when they ﬂy in the face of orthodox
vedic values. Tantric practices are always textually substantiated and
the origin of those texts claimed to be beyond the world in a tran-
scendent source. The Tantras of all traditions locate their origin from
the mouth of their God (or the Buddha or Mah®v¬ra) and claim that
through a process of dilution, simpliﬁcation and shortening, they have
come to the human world via intermediaries, usually sages who have
often undergone great penance to gain the scripture. Their purpose
is guidance, liberation and pleasure or power for those lost in the
ocean of birth, death and rebirth.4
   We need to understand the Tantras in the context of scripture
in India. First, text is inseparable from tradition and formed
within tradition, although a text can have such consequences as to
change tradition completely (as in the case of the New Testament
                       The Tantric Body

in Christianity). Second, the tantric traditions are regarded as a
revelation from a transcendent source and the texts describe the
‘descent of the Tantra’ (tantr®vat®ra)5 from a pure, divine origin but
becoming eroded in the course of its descent to the human world,
where it is sometimes presented as a particular (vi˜e◊a) or esoteric
revelation for the few with the qualiﬁcation (adhik®ra) to receive it,
in contrast to the exoteric, vedic scriptures. Third, the Tantras need
to be seen in what Inden, following Collingwood, has called a ‘scale
of texts’ in which a text is positioned in relation to others usually in
a hierarchy such that ‘[t]exts at each level in the scale supplement
and comment on the levels below.’6 This is clearly the case with the
Tantras, which present themselves in a scale of revelation, relegating
other traditions to lower levels of this revelation and reading the
earlier traditions through the lens of their own revelation. There
is a high degree of intentionality in the scale of Tantras such that
if a text does not deal with the details of a particular topic, it is
assumed that this is covered elsewhere. Finally, following Inden, we
need to understand the anonymous Tantras (and some related texts
with named authors) as having a composite authorship,7 and so when
speaking about the intentionality of a text or ‘author’ of a text we
are not speaking in terms of authorial intention in the usual sense.
Thus an account of scripture in Tantrism needs to be placed in an
account of the vedic understanding of the scripture and revelation
that were current at the time of the rise of the Tantras. There is no
space to develop this here, but we can say that according to vedic
exegesis, the M¬m®m. s®, revelation is a system of signs that points
to a transcendent meaning. This revelation has no author, and so
that transcendent meaning must be understood in terms of its inner
intentionality and is therefore self-validating. Ny®ya, by contrast,
refuted the atheism of M¬m®m. s® and proposed God as the author of
the Veda. The Tantras are closer to the Ny®ya perspective and are
interestingly defended by the Ny®ya philosopher Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa.8

              The Validity of Tantric Revelation

Rigorously defending the Veda against sceptical and M¬m®m. saka
critics, Jayantha offers proofs that the author of the Veda is God
                      The Tantric Revelation                         

on the grounds that Praj®pati, the Lord of creatures, says that he
is the author, the Veda is composite like other objects in the world
such as cloth, and so, like cloth, must have a maker, and the validity
of the Veda is furthermore ensured by their being spoken by trust-
worthy people.9 In a parallel way Jayantha defends the authenticity
and authority of the tantric revelation. As a theist he accepts the
possibility of further revelation from a divine source and as a phil-
osopher maintains criteria for their acceptance or rejection, namely
their accordance with received, orthodox scriptural tradition and
their wider acceptance by knowledgeable persons. For him scriptural
revelation is not a closed canon. There are ﬁve criteria of authenticity
that Jayantha uses: they must have been accepted by an assemblage
of great persons (mah®janasam‚he), by a large number of learned
persons (˜i◊ﬂa); they should not appear unprecedented (n®p‚rv® ...
bh®nti) even if only recently composed; they should not be motivated
by greed; and they should not cause people agitation (nodvijate).10
The ˆaiva Tantras (he uses the term ®gamas) meet these conditions
in that they do not contradict the truths offered in the Veda, being
pervaded by Upani◊adic teachings about liberation, and do not go
against the caste system. Indeed, they only add new rituals. Even
the P®ñcar®tra revelation is authentic in Jayantha’s eyes, authored
by Lord Vi◊n. u, who is God, the creator, preserver and destroyer of
the world. He cannot imagine that the ˆaiva and P®ñcar®tra Tantras
are composed from motives of greed or delusion, although this is
not the case with Buddhist scriptures since they are not afﬁliated to
the Veda and advocate the abandoning of traditional values and the
institution of caste. Furthermore, the Buddhists are morally inferior,
being indifferent to the world and addicted to animal slaughter.11
It is not precisely clear which ‘wicked Buddhists’ Jayantha means,
although he is referring to tantric Buddhism and perhaps the more
extreme antinomian practices that go against caste and Brahmanical
mores, taught in the Yogin¬ Tantras.
    Nor is Jayantha completely convinced about the authenticity of
all the ˆaiva Tantras. In very humorous vein in the §gama¥ambara,
Jayantha raises his doubts about the legitimacy of certain groups.
In Act  of the play, the central character, a Brahman, is astonished
(vismaya) to witness a man and woman entwined together in a single
                       The Tantric Body

blue garment (n¬lambara), exclaiming ‘Oh alas, such asceticism [I
have never seen] before!’12 They are singing very tenderly (atipe˜ala)
but many more come into view, singing songs of their sect (carcar¬)
in the vulgar tongue, drinking spirituous liquor, and behaving in a
very excited and dissolute way (ativipluta), their observance (vrata)
involving sex that disrupts correct, vedic behaviour with regard to
                                              .
caste and stage of life.13 The Brahman San kar◊an. a observes that this
n¬lambara ‘asceticism’ is a new practice (n‚tanamadyapravr. tta) that
is a form of the great vow (mah®vrata) that the L®kula P®˜upata
ascetics followed. He is fearful of pollution and so shocked by such
extraordinary ascetic behaviour (tapa˜cary®˜caryam) that he resolves
to tell the King and to ensure that such people are banished from the
land. Jayantha tells us in the play, and in the Ny®yamañjari, that King
   .
ˆan karavarman (– ) does indeed ban the n¬lambara sect.14
Jayantha is also sceptical of the K®p®likas who beg from a cranial
begging bowl and who appear in the §gama¥ambara as two cremation
ground ascetics fearful for their future having heard how the king
is cracking down on such sects.15 Other ascetics are also fearful of
the king’s wrath, but our hero assures them that sects such as the
ˆaivas, P®˜upatas and K®l®mukhas have nothing to fear as they are
in line with vedic values and practices, as is the Bh®gavata sect that
reveres the P®ñcar®tra scriptures dealt with in the ﬁnal act.
   That Jayantha is writing about the Tantras probably before 
, a hundred years before the ˆaiva polymath Abhinavagupta, is
signiﬁcant for it shows that these traditions had achieved a strong
degree of development by his time. It also shows that these tradi-
tions are indeed still developing with new texts being produced
with such appeal that thinkers like Jayatha feel the need to make
judgements about them. Indeed, Dyczkowski observes that the ˆaiva
Tantras proliferated at an extremely rapid rate in the centuries before
Abhinavagupta.16 Jayantha speciﬁcally mentions ˆaiva and P®ñcar®tra
texts, and it is this broad distinction that we need to give some
account of, for this is the body of material that provides us with
the ritual foundations that deﬁne the tantric traditions and become
so inﬂuential. This is not the place for a systematic exposition of
the main textual developments in the traditions; for that I refer the
reader to the excellent essay by Alexis Sanderson.17 The intention is,
                      The Tantric Revelation                        

rather, to provide some orientation and to give some broad indication
of their historical location. The entextualisation of the body in the
tantric traditions is the entextualisation of speciﬁc texts, written in
speciﬁc times and places.
   The Tantras are dialogues between the main deity of the tradition
and his/her spouse or a sage. Tantras focused on ˆiva are presented
as a dialogue between him and his Goddess or ˆakti, Tantras of
Vi◊n. u between him, particularly in his form as N®r®yan. a, and his
consort Lak◊m¬, or with a sage such as N®rada and in some Tantras
focused on a form of the Goddess; it is ˆiva who asks questions of
her. These texts are traditionally divided into four sections, knowl-
edge (jñ®na), yoga, acting (kriy®) and behaving (cary®). Very few
are actually constructed like this and those that are tend to be later,
although this nevertheless provides a useful way in which to approach
the texts. Most Tantras are primarily concerned with kriy® and cary®,
with daily ritual, with temple construction and the consecration of
images. The Tantras themselves are generally little concerned with
philosophy in the sense of presenting arguments about the nature of
being and knowledge, but they do contain metaphysical speculation
about the structure of the cosmos. Indeed, this is fundamental to
many texts and, even if not explicitly stated, informs descriptions
of ritual.


                  The Pāñcarātra Revelation

Along with Jayantha, other orthodox thinkers took up the defence
of some of the Tantras. Within the Vai◊n. ava tradition Y®muna (c.
– ), the grand teacher of the famous theologian R®m®nuja,
wrote the §gamapr®m®n. ya, a defence of the revelation of the tantric
Vai◊n. ava or P®ñcar®tra tradition. The P®ñcar®tra sources provide
a large body of texts concerned with the usual tantric topics of
cosmology, initiation, daily and occasional ritual, mantras and the
construction of temples. Y®muna defends this body of texts as
being on a par with the Veda: ‘The P®ñcar®tra Tantra is authorita-
tive like the vedic sentences ordaining sacriﬁce (jyoti◊ﬂoma etc.) on
the grounds that it is based on knowledge free from all defects.’18
                       The Tantric Body

Indeed, Y®muna agrees with Jayantha and the M¬m®m. sakas that
scripture is self-validating, that its authority is not questionable
because the texts are the utterance of the Lord of the Universe,
V®sudeva. According to another P®ñcar®tra defender, Amal®nanda,
the §gamas do not have the same self-authenticating validity as the
Veda, but their authenticity is nevertheless assured because the Veda
bear witness to the omniscience of V®sudeva.19 Evidently Y®muna’s
defence was successful in so far as R®m®nuja accepts the authority
of the texts (although perhaps with some difﬁdence) and P®ñcar®tra
rites become central in the ˆr¬ Vai◊n. ava tradition that became the
dominant form of Vai◊n. avism in the South.20
    Two traditions within Vai◊n. avism lay claim to the designation
tantra: the Vaikh®nasa tradition and the P®ñcar®tra. The Vaikh®nasa
regards itself as wholly orthodox and in line with vedic revelation,
although it has its own texts, the fourth-century  Vaikh®nasa-s‚tra
that described daily worship of Vi◊n. u and a collection of Sam. hit®s
which describe offerings to the emanations of Vi◊n. u or V®sudeva,
Puru◊a, Satya, and Acyuta, that we also know from the P®ñcar®tra
Jay®khya-sam. hit® (see p. ). The Vaikh®nasa texts, as Colas
shows, divide what they call vai◊n. ava tantra into the Vaikh®nasa
and P®ñcar®tra, where the former is the principal (mukhya) tradi-
tion and the latter the complementary (gaun. a) to protect it. Yet
the tradition also claims to be vaidika and of gentle (saumya) qual-
ity, in contrast to the P®ñcar®tra, which is t®ntrika and non-vedic
(avaidika).21 Clearly the P®ñcar®tra must be seen as an independent
tradition not subordinated to the Vaikh®nasa, but the connections
between the two traditions show the complexity and overlapping
nature of the terms t®ntrika and vaidika.
    The P®ñcar®tra Sam. hit®s form a massive body of texts which
have received comparatively little scholarly attention, although Otto
Schrader’s Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra () remains an exemplary
work.22 There are three texts regarded as key, namely the S®ttvata-
sam. hit®, Pau◊kara-sam. hit®, and the Jay®khya-sam. hit®, known as the
‘three gems’.23 These texts are believed to be the revelation of Vi◊n. u
or V®sudeva, also called N®r®yan. a but are clearly within the general
category of tantra and dealing with the general topics of cosmology,
mantra and ritual. The dating of these texts is difﬁcult to establish,
                      The Tantric Revelation                         

but the Jay®khya is quoted by the ˆaiva thinker Utpaladeva (c.
– ) and so predates him.

                      The Śaiva Revelation

Orthodox thinkers such as Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa and Y®muna are keen
to establish the legitimacy of much of the tantric revelation, or
part of it, by asserting its vedic inheritance and claiming that the
teachings of these texts do not contravene vedic injunction. Another
strategy, however, was very different, and this was to proclaim boldly
the superiority of the tantric revelation over the vedic. The Veda
are for an earlier time and for a lower level of understanding, but
the tantric revelation is the truth of God opened out in a graded
hierarchy for the initiate. This was the view of the non-dualist ˆaiva
thinkers of Kashmir, particularly Abhinavagupta (c. – ),
who argued not only for the legitimacy of the tantric revelation but
for its superiority, especially in his monumental Illumination of the
Tantras (Tantr®loka). While theologians of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta,
such as R®makan. ﬂha, wished to align their scriptures and practices
with vedic orthodoxy, theologians of the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions
– commonly referred to as ‘Kashmir’ ˆaivism – on the contrary
wished to distance their scriptures from what they perceived to be
the restrictive and limited nature of the vedic scriptures. While
clearly being well versed in the orthodox texts, Abhinavagupta and
his followers saw these merely as ‘external’ scriptures and as inﬂows
into a higher expansion of consciousness articulated through the
ˆaiva revelation.
   The structure of the ˆaiva canon and the traditions that it expresses
are complex.24 Much of the voluminous tantric corpus arose in the
context of yogic and visionary practices, particularly the Buddhist
‘pure vision’ texts and the ‘treasure system’ or discovering hidden
treasure (nidhi, gter-ma) such as sacred texts found in both Buddhist
and Hindu tantric traditions.25 While such texts are in one sense new,
they are nevertheless part of an ongoing tradition of revelation and
a canon that is not ﬁxed in the early medieval period. For now it is
important to understand the tantric ˆaiva view of revelation in order
to comprehend the ways in which these texts become internalised by
                       The Tantric Body

the practitioner. The body of the practitioner reﬂects the body of the
text. For the non-dual ˆaiva theologian Abhinavagupta, revelation
is divine speech; the making known to human beings the nature
of transcendent reality, the processes whereby that reality takes
on form as, and in, the world, and the methods for its realisation.
Abhinavagupta sees scriptural revelation as the disclosing of divine
reality, which for him is pure, universal consciousness (caitanya, cit,
sam. vit), the highest expression of which is articulated in the Tantras
of non-Saiddh®ntika tradition called the Trika and the related tradi-
tion of the Krama. Indeed, there are different levels of revelation
linked to different levels of understanding, which are further linked
to the levels of a hierarchical cosmos. For Abhinavagupta the highest
revelation is a text called the M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra, on which he
wrote a commentary (˜lokav®rttika) and on which his Tantr®loka is
a practical text of exposition or manual (paddhati) along with its
summary, the Tantras®ra.26 While the M®lin¬ itself appears to follow a
dualist metaphysics, as Sanderson has demonstrated, Abhinavagupta
projects on to it the monism derived from his Krama sources and
from his own lineage in the ‘recognition’ or Pratyabhijñ® school.27
For Abhinavagupta, revelation, consciousness and cosmology entail
each other. Thus he saw the texts of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, the dualist
tradition of ˆaivism that aligned itself with vedic orthodoxy, as being
a lower level of divine disclosure than the texts of his own Trika
and Krama traditions, which, according to him, revealed the true
nature of reality as non-dual; that ultimately there is no distinction
between self and ˆiva, nor between self and world. The truth of
scripture, its esoteric heart, reveals the nature of self and world as
dynamic, vibrating consciousness (spanda).
    Abhinavagupta classiﬁes the tantric revelation into three divisions
in his commentary on the M®lin¬: the division of ˆiva (˜ivabheda),
comprising ten Tantras; of Rudra (rudrabheda), comprising eight-
een Tantras; and of Bhairava (bhairavabheda), comprising sixty-four
Tantras.28 These categories of text express the metaphysical positions
of dualism, dualism-cum-nondualism, and non-dualism respectively,
of which the latter is the superior for Abhinavagupta. Certainly the
ˆaiva Siddh®nta accept twenty-eight Tantras as authoritative (the ten
ˆiva and eighteen Rudra), although the lists vary in different texts
                        The Tantric Revelation                            

and there are also complementary texts or Up®gamas associated with
them.29 This fairly simple division is complicated by Abhinavagupta,
in that he needs to relate it to the classiﬁcation found in the Tantras
of a division into ﬁve streams ﬂowing from the ﬁve mouths of ˆiva
in his form as Sad®˜iva. The form of Sad®˜iva with ﬁve faces is
primarily a body of power (˜®kta vapus) made up of mantras. On this
account the source of the scriptures is the mantra body of ˆiva, the
body of power and sound. Abhinavagupta describes the Sad®˜iva as
having ﬁve mantras as his body, namely ¡˜®na, Tatpuru◊a, Aghora,
V®madeva and Sadyoj®ta, each of these facing a direction in which
the revealed tantric corpus ﬂows.30 The mantras of these ﬁve, as
found, for example, in the Mr. gendr®gama following the K®mik®gama,
are as follows:31
                Om. hom. ¬˜®nam‚rdhne namaΩ
                Om. hem. tatpuru◊avaktr®ya namaΩ
                Om. hum. aghorahr̄. day®ya namaΩ
                Om. him. v®madevaguhy®ya namaΩ
                Om. ham. sadyoj®tam‚rtaye namaΩ

Each of these is associated with the directions and other pentads in
ˆaiva theology, particularly the ﬁve acts of ˆiva of creation, main-
tenance, destruction, concealing and revealing and with classes of
scripture and teachings. Thus we have the following correspondences
detailed by Hanneder:32

  Face         Direction Scripture           Teaching
  Sadyoj®ta    West        R. g-veda         worldly knowledge
                                             (laukikavijñ®na)
  V®madeva     North       Yajur-veda        vedic teachings (vaidika)
  Aghora       South       S®ma-veda         teaching about the supreme
                                             self (adhy®tmika)
  Tatpuru◊a    East        Atharava-veda     the higher path (atim®rga)
  ¡˜®na        Zenith      ‘comprising all   path of mantra
                           knowledge’        (mantram®rga)

Hanneder explains that the scripture ‘consisting of all knowledge’
(sarvavidy®tmaka) refers to the next set of correspondences, namely
the scriptures of the path of mantras. Some later sources complicate
                        The Tantric Body

the scheme further by categorising the tantric scriptures into twenty-
ﬁve streams (ﬁve times ﬁve faces).33
   Tantric ˆaivism is therefore the path of mantras which ﬂows from
the upper face of Sad®˜iva. This ¡˜®na face is further divided into
ﬁve currents of groups of Tantras, as follows:34

              Direction      Face            Tantra
              Zenith         ¡˜®na           Siddh®nta
              East           Tatpuru◊a       Garu¥a
              North          V®madeva        V®ma
              West           Sadyoj®ta       Bh‚ta
              South          Aghora          Bhairava

Relating this to Abhinavagupta’s threefold classiﬁcation, the ˜ivabheda
and rudrabheda ﬂow from the ¡˜®na face while the bhairavabheda
fuses the northern and southern faces.35 Abhinavagupta further
complicates the scheme by reference to a lower, hidden face turned
towards the subterranean worlds (naraka). The Siddh®nta Tantras
are the twenty-eight dualist texts, and the Bhairava Tantras are
those of the non-Saiddh®ntika tradition that forms the scriptur-
al basis of Abhinavagupta’s Trika. Hanneder quotes a text, the
ˆivatattvaratn®kara, that describes the four streams below the ¡˜®na
face, saying that the Garu¥a Tantras teach the Tatpuru◊a mantra as
the antidote for snakebites and poisoning; the Bhairava Tantras teach
the destruction of enemies; and the Bh‚ta Tantras teach mantras
and herbs for the paciﬁcation of ghosts and demons.36
   Abhinavagupta has the highest regard for revelation (®gama),
which, he says, forms the basis for one’s life (upaj¬vya)37 and which
should be followed in order to reach perfection. This perfection
is achieved quickly through pursuing the teachings in the scrip-
tures of the left stream (v®ma˜®sana) and transcending the vedic
scriptures, which rest in the ‘womb of illusion’ (m®yodarasthitam).38
These scriptures lead to the highest perfection of consciousness
(sam. vitsiddham), a perfection to be realised in one’s own experience
(sv®nubhavasiddham) beyond the mere ritual action declared in the
Veda that should be forsaken.39 Relying on ˆaiva scriptures allows
us to go beyond apprehension or fear (˜an. kh®) characteristic of the
                           The Tantric Revelation                               

                          The Tantric Revelation
                 (based on Sanderson’s mapping of the traditions)

Veda                Purān. a                                  Tantra
M¬m®m. s®,
Ny®ya
interpretation      Sm®rta worship          non-Puranic
                    of ˆiva and Vi◊n. u     worship of ˆiva
                                      atim®rga
                                      (P®˜upata S‚tras)
                                                mantram®rga
                                           ˆaiva Siddh®nta
                                           (dualist Tantras)
                                                           non-Saiddh®ntika
                                                           groups
                                                           (Bhairava Tantras)
                                                             Kaula Tantras
‹ + –––––––––––––– Degree of conformity to vedic values –––––––––––––– - ›



Veda and orthodox Brahmanical teachings, for the ˆaiva teachings
are their reversal (viparyaya).40 Abhinavagupta further subdivides the
Bhairava Tantras into four ‘seats’ or ‘thrones’ in ascending order of
importance, that of man. ¥ala (man. ¥alap¬ﬂha), mudr® (mudr®p¬ﬂha),
mantra (mantrapﬂ¬ha) and the throne of vidy® (vidy®p¬ﬂha), where
vidy® doesn’t simply mean ‘knowledge’ but is a kind of mantra
associated with female deities. This is a feature of the distinction,
the mantrap¬ﬂha being connected to male deities, the vidy®p¬ﬂha to
female ones.41 The Svacchandabhairava-tantra, a text popular in the
Kashmir valley at the time of Abhinavagupta, is an example of the
former, while the Siddhayoge˜var¬mata is in the latter category, with
the M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra as its essence.42 It is this text, itself part
of the longer scripture (the Siddhayog¬˜var¬mata) that forms the
basic scriptural authority for Trika ˆaivism, which Abhinavagupta
regarded as the highest revelation of ˆiva. It describes itself as having
been a small part of the much larger scripture but reduced for the
understanding of those possessing only weak intellects (alpadh¬hita).43
Thus for Abhinavagupta we have a graded hierarchy of revelation,
                      The Tantric Body

with the wholly external Veda being transcended by scripture focused
on male power (the mantrap¬ﬂha), being superseded by the most eso-
teric focused on the power of the feminine divine (the vidy®p¬ﬂha).


                       Text and Tradition

The precise relationship between the indigenous classiﬁcation
schemes outlined above and the social-historical development of the
tantric traditions is not clear, but the schemes do arguably represent
forms of self-description that corresponded to speciﬁc traditions,
although the relationship between text and tradition is complex in
the ˆaiva case. Sanderson has mapped out this relationship in some
detail; what follows is a simpliﬁed reading of his mapping.44 If we
understand this revelation in terms of proximity to orthodoxy and
vedic revelation, then on the one hand we have worshippers of ˆiva
wholly in line with Sm®rta brahmanical orthodoxy who follow rites
of worship expressed in the Pur®n. as, while on the other hand we
have non-puranic worship of ˆiva. These ˆaivas were ascetics known
generally as the P®˜upatas, who thought of themselves as following
a higher or outer path (atim®rga) and fulﬁlling a ﬁfth stage beyond
the four orthodox stages or ways of life (®˜rama).45 Although they
were ascetics, they became highly successful in terms of control of
temples and with a great deal of political inﬂuence. Indeed, they
displayed martial qualities which aligned them with the later naked
ascetics, the N®gas, who defended orthodox dharma.46 One branch
of the P®˜upatas, the L®kula, advocated practices threatening to
Brahmanical orthodoxy, namely the carrying of a cranium begging
bowl and skull-topped staff, and taking the great vow (mah®vrata)
or penance prescribed in the dharma literature for killing a Brahman
of wandering as a mendicant carrying his skull for twelve years.47 In
carrying a skull these ascetics imitated ˆiva, who in myth followed
this -year penance for decapitating one of Brahm®’s ﬁve heads
with the thumb nail of his left hand. In the twelfth year the skull
fell from his hand at K®p®lamocana in Benares.48
    Technically the puranic followers of ˆiva were Mahe˜varas con-
cerned with ritual purity and following orthodox, puranic worship
                      The Tantric Revelation                        

of ˆiva, while those who had undergone an initiation, such as the
P®˜upatas, were ˆaivas. So, worship of ˆiva can be classiﬁed into the
Mahe˜varas and the ˆaivas. The ˆaivas themselves can be classiﬁed
into the higher or outer path (atim®rga), ﬂowing from the mouth
of Tatpuru◊a, and path of mantra (mantram®rga), ﬂowing from
the mouth of ¡˜®na, which follows the revelation of the Tantras.
This classiﬁcation scheme further breaks down the mantram®rga
into the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, whose focus is the deity Sad®˜iva and
whose followers saw their revelation as not disruptive of the Veda
and Brahmanical social norms, and non-Saiddh®ntika groups. The
ˆaiva Siddh®nta is normative tantric ˆaivism, the basic system of
the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions, which sees itself as in line with
vedic revelation and the teachings of the orthodox Brahmans. At
the other extreme we have non-Saiddh®ntika Tantras, whose focus
is the ferocious form of ˆiva, Bhairava, and whose followers situated
themselves within the culture against Brahmanical orthodoxy. These
Bhairava Tantras were the revelation of traditions which propagated
practices that went against orthodox values, particularly expressed
in making offerings of meat, wine and sexual substances to appease
their ferocious gods (see pp. , ). The followers of these texts,
and their originators, were the K®p®lika ascetics who inherited the
L®kula practice of the great vow. They used a skull begging bowl,
covered themselves with the ashes from cremation grounds, and car-
ried a skull-topped staff (the forerunners of the modern Aghor¬s).49
In the early medieval period, texts produced in their milieu became
the main scriptural authority for the monistic ˆaivism of Kashmir,
focused on the ferocious Bhairava or ˆakti as K®l¬ in one of her
forms. Indeed, Tantras devoted to the Goddess became important
especially in the later tradition, and we need to mention here one last
classiﬁcation scheme, that of the revelation of the Kaula Tantras.
    While the Bhairava Tantras are an early, proliﬁc and most im-
portant development within ˆaivism, a further group of texts was
developing at the same time which saw themselves as being within
a tradition that emphasised the Goddess or ˆakti, the power of
ˆiva. These traditions called themselves the ‘family’ (kula) or those
traditions related to one of the families of goddesses (kaula). But
while there is an emphasis on ˆakti, the Kaula Tantras nevertheless
                       The Tantric Body

regard themselves as ˆaiva and worship Bhairava as their supreme
deity. In complete contrast to the Tantras of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, the
Kaula Tantras are mostly concerned with private ritual in secluded
places and making offerings of meat, wine and sexual substances
(kun. ¥agolaka) to ferocious Bhairava and his consort Bharav¬. An
important classiﬁcation of this group of Tantras is found in texts
such as the Yogin¬hr. daya. This text divides scriptural transmission
into four currents: the eastern or primary (p‚rv®mnaya), contain-
ing texts of the Kaula tradition and worshipping ˆiva and the
Goddess as Kule˜vara and Kule˜var¬; the upper transmission of
the ferocious Goddess Guhyak®l¬ pertaining to the Krama tradition;
the Western transmission of the crooked Goddess Kubjik® associated
with Kun. ¥alin¬; and the southern transmission forming the ˆr¬vidy®
tradition focused on the gentle, erotic Goddess Tripurasundar¬.50 The
ˆr¬vidy® in particular grew and developed in South India, where it
exists to the present day. It is often the ˆr¬vidy® which is taken as
the standard model of Tantrism, but in the present text it will only
be looked at tangentially.51
   The important Trika (‘threefold’) based on the non-Saiddh®ntika
Tantras is so called because of the three goddesses Par®, Par®par®
and Apar® named in the M®lin¬. Abhinavagupta tries to show how
these goddesses are themselves emanations of a single, underlying
reality of consciousness and he suffuses the text with his idealism
partly derived from his initiation into the Krama system, a rigorously
idealist system that saw the world only in terms of vibrating con-
sciousness. This text forms the basis of Abhinavagupta’s system, and
his commentary on the text (v®rtika), along with the independent
work Tantr®loka and its summary the Tantras®ra, is exegesis of this
scripture.52


            The Tantric Theology of Revelation

While texts of primary revelation, the Tantras, are mostly concerned
with cosmology and ritual and not explicitly with philosophical argu-
ment, tantric theology, such as the recognition school (Pratyabhijñ®),
tried to maintain the universality of supreme consciousness53 and
                      The Tantric Revelation                         

to refute schools such as the Ny®ya which maintained a form of
dualism in which the body and self can exist without each other. Yet
while wishing to maintain the universality and superiority of their
doctrines over the vedic schools, and so identifying universality with
truth, this identiﬁcation is not matched at the level of ritual and its
textual instantiation. Here, rather than truth being identiﬁed with
universality, it is identiﬁed with particularity; with the particularity
of revelation (vi˜e◊a˜®stra) in contrast with the general revelation
(sam®ya˜®stra) of the Veda and lower scriptures. On the one hand,
in doctrine and argument we have the refutation of other schools
and the maintaining of the universality of consciousness; on the
other, we have the refutation of other schools by the disparaging of
universality and the emphasising of the particular, esoteric revelation
of the Tantras in a graded hierarchy, revealed through an initiatory
structure through a master (guru, ®c®rya). For the monistic ˆaivas,
the higher up the scale the more particular the revelation and the
closer to the truth of pure consciousness; the lower down the scale,
the more general the revelation and the further from the truth of
pure consciousness. This is not so much a contradiction, because
the claims operate at different levels, as an attempt to bring together
the universal and the particular, which can be seen, above all, in the
tantric ideas of the power, vision and levels of awakening located
within the body.
   If we can speak of a tantric theology of revelation, then we might
say that it is characterised by a belief in a hierarchy of revealed
truths and that this hierarchy is liturgically expressed in a hierarchy
of initiation. Thus for Abhinavagupta, ˆaiva Siddh®nta initiation
revealed in the dualist Tantras is the expression of, and gives access
to, the cosmic level from which its revelation originates (namely
Sad®˜iva). By contrast, Trika initiation revealed in the non-dualist
Tantras is an expression of and gives access to a higher revelation
from the supreme ˆiva or even from the Goddess (K®lasam. kar◊in. ¬).
In all cases we see that the tantric traditions generally regarded their
scriptures as transcending those of the vedic tradition. One should,
perhaps, speak of tantric theologies of revelation in so far as monistic
traditions such as Abhinavagupta’s ‘recognition’ school (Pratyabhijñ®)
must ultimately undermine the very notion of revelation as coming
                       The Tantric Body

from a source distinct from the self, whereas theistic or dualist
theologies, such as the ˆaiva Siddh®nta and P®ñcar®tra, maintain
a stronger notion of revelation because it is truly the divine word
expressed to beings who are ontologically distinct from its source.
But while this issue of dualism and non-dualism is important, there
are general features of tantric revelation and its interpretation that
distinguish it from the Veda and vedic schools of interpretation,
particularly the M¬m®m. s®, although there is some overlap between
Pratyabhijñ® epistemology and M¬m®m. s®. We can express this ﬁrst
in terms of a rejection of M¬m®m. saka doctrines, and second in
a particular understanding of language that draws heavily on the
Grammarian school.
   The tantric theology rejects the M¬m®m. saka proposition that
scripture is without authorship. The Tantras are composed and
revealed by a transcendent theistic reality for the sake of suffering
souls.54 They give an account of the path to liberation and an ac-
count of how the world came to be as it is. R®makan. ﬂha, the ˆaiva
Siddh®nta commentator on the Kiran. a-tantra, says that a teaching
(˜®stra) is authoritative ‘only because it is the creation of the Lord,
not because it is unauthored [as the M¬m®m. sakas assert in the case
of the Veda] since that is impossible.’55 The Kiran. a-tantra is taught
by the Lord, Hara (a name for ˆiva), to Garu¥a and records their
conversation, Garu¥a having received the requisite initiation to
hear the scripture, which is only opened to the initiated.56 In his
commentary on the S®rdhatri˜atik®lottara, R®makan. ﬂha says that
§gamas are revealed by Sad®˜iva to the Vidye˜varas and thence
to the sages, becoming more and more abridged in their descent
due to the limited span of human life, their limited energy, limited
intellect, limited wealth and possessing greed and delusion.57 The
Matan. gaparame˜vara-tantra describes the transmission of the treatise
from the mouth of Parame˜vara as a subtle sound to the lineage
of the various masters. Sad®˜iva announces it in  million verses,
Ananta condenses it in a , verses to the sage ˆr¬kan. ﬂha, who
                                          .
recites its , verses to the sage Matanga.58 Again, the S®rdhatri˜at
ik®lottar®gama declares that it is a condensed version in  verses of
a version of , verses revealed by ˆiva to his son K®rtikeya, not
a small book R®makan. ﬂha dryly observes (na hy alpagrantham), which
                     The Tantric Revelation                        

itself was a condensation of the V®tul®gama of  million verses!59
In its opening verses the M®lin¬ describes its descent to the world
from the mouth of the supreme Lord, who communicates the text to
the Goddess Um®, saying that he himself had obtained it from the
Supreme Self Aghora. Kum®ra, who heard the exposition, told the
text to the sages (r. ◊i), who in turn conveyed it to humanity.60 The
Jay®khya-sam. hit® of the P®ñcar®tra was originally taught, it says,
by the Lord (Bhagavat) to the sage N®rada, but in the current age,
due to the absence of dharma, must be rendered in a shorter and
simpliﬁed form.61 This is a standard pattern in the Tantras: they
perceive themselves to be smaller, simpler versions of texts which
are lost or which are too long and complex to be understood by
modern humans and so a more limited version is required. As the
text descends we might say that it becomes more diluted. Unlike the
M¬m®m. saka position, meaning lies in the intention of the author,
namely a transcendent theistic reality, to communicate a message to
those with the qualiﬁcation to hear it.
   Extending this idea we might even say that as the voice of ˆiva
is expressed in the texts of revelation, in the Tantras, it is also
expressed in the cosmos itself. As in the texts there is an inher-
ence of word (˜abda) and denotation or meaning (artha), so in the
hierarchical cosmos there is an inherence of sound with cosmic
structure. The course of cosmic unfolding involves a relation be-
tween language, the signiﬁer (v®caka), and that to which it points,
the signiﬁed (v®cya). According to the monistic ˆaivas, this relation
is one of inherence; word and meaning are united whose meaning
explodes upon consciousness (sphoﬂa).62
   Behind this more philosophical formulation is the idea of divine
sound, that the absolute power is primarily manifested as sound (n®da,
˜abda). This cosmic sound manifests and resonates in all the levels of
the cosmos, through supreme and subtle to gross levels where it is ex-
pressed as mantra. The Siddh®nta text the S®rdhatri˜atik®lottar®gama
says that this sound or n®da is the supreme seed within all beings63
whose form, says the commentator R®makan. ﬂha, is an inner sound
which (and he here quotes an unidentiﬁed text) moves up through
the body to the mouth and takes on the quality of formulated sound
(varn. atva) as a word (˜abda). Without n®da sentence could not be
                       The Tantric Body

heard nor words denote; it is the basis of conversation (sam. jalpa).
Thus even transactional speech has its root in the hierarchical cosmos
pervaded by the power of the Lord as sound. This cosmic sound
emanates from ˆakti and from it the ‘drop’ (bindu) which generates
the lower universe.64


                    Revelation and Doctrine

Before we move to express the ways in which scripture is internal-
ised within the practitioner’s body, we need ﬁnally to make some
remarks about the metaphysical content of the tantric revelation.
Abhinavagupta and others in the Pratyabhijñ® tradition were meta-
physical non-dualists, believing that what is revealed through scrip-
tures is a supreme reality of consciousness only and that all appearance
is but a form of consciousness. Subjects and objects adhere within
this substratum of consciousness, and liberation is the recognition
(pratyabhijñ®) of one’s identity with that. The limited indexicality
of the practitioner ﬁlls out to the cosmic indexicality of ˆiva; ‘I’
(aham) becomes ‘I-ness’ (ahanta). The universe, says Abhinavagupta’s
student K◊emar®ja, is identical with consciousness, which, although
appearing to be distinct from consciousness, in reality is not, as the
reﬂection of a city in a mirror appears to be distinct from it, yet
in reality is not.65 This monistic idealism (to which we will return
in Chapter ) is what is revealed in scripture. The true revelation,
on this view, is not simply the text but the power of consciousness
behind it. As with all monistic systems, it is difﬁcult to maintain
consistently a pure monism in language which implicitly contains a
distinction between subject and object; inevitably the ˆaiva monists
needed to lapse into a language of emanation and manifestation.
The universe, along with the scriptures of the different traditions,
is the emanation of a consciousness which at the highest level is
pure and unsullied, but which becomes more and more differenti-
ated into subject and object. This is a ‘descent’ or manifestation of
consciousness as lower cosmic levels. All other traditions are partial
revelations from ˆiva, fragments (khan. ¥akhan. ¥a) extracted from the
one revelation (®gama) but which cause people to wander in the world
                      The Tantric Revelation                          

deluded (mohita).66 Thus K◊emar®ja places different scriptures and
their teachings at different levels of this hierarchy. The Buddhists
and M¬m®m. sakas are only at the level of the higher mind (buddhi),
while the P®ñcar®tra is at the level of unmanifest nature (prakr. ti),
the Ved®ntins at the level of ¡˜vara in the ‘pure course’ of creation,
and so on, with only the ˆaiva teachings of pure consciousness, the
Trika, at the top in maintaining the doctrine that consciousness is
transcendent (vi˜vottirn. a) and immanent (vi˜v®tmaka) in manifesta-
tion.67 The scriptures of the respective schools are thus linked to
those levels in a graded hierarchy. The scriptures of the Siddh®nta
are lower than those of the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions (in their
view) because they teach dualism, that the self is distinct from the
Lord and the manifest and unmanifest universe. In contrast, the
scriptures of the Trika, particularly the M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra,
emanate from the highest cosmic level for the non-dualists.
    If we are to maintain, as the non-dualist ˆaivas did, that the actual
text before the reader is a physical manifestation or pale reﬂection of
a pure work, then it follows that the ‘work’ as the revelation proper is
identical with consciousness. For the ˆaiva monist the true revelation
is that all is consciousness. While recognising that the scriptures of
the Siddh®nta were dualist, texts of non-Saiddh®ntika tradition and
texts that were close to the Saiddh®ntikas became subject to rigorous
interpretation through the lens of this monistic metaphysics by the
Kashmiri non-dualists. The ˆaiva texts that occupied the middle
ground between the Siddh®nta and the more extreme ˆaiva and
Kaula texts, namely the Netra-tantra and Svacchanda-tantra, came
under the scrutiny of K◊emar®ja, who wrote commentaries on both
texts, claiming them for the monists. This raises interesting ques-
tions about the relation of doctrine to these revealed texts and the
historical inﬂuences at work in them.
    Alexis Sanderson has argued that most of the Tantras are in fact
dualistic in their orientation. This is clearly and explicitly so with
the Tantras of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, but is also the case with most
texts of the non-Saiddh®ntika tradition. Indeed, he argues that the
root text of the Trika tradition, the M®lin¬vijayottara itself is actu-
ally dualist; Abhinavagupta projecting on to it his monism derived
from Krama sources and from his own lineage in the ‘recognition’
                          The Tantric Body

or Pratyabhijñ® school.68 References to non-dualism in the text are
to ritual, namely that in worship one should adopt the highest non-
dualism (param®dvaita), which means that one should not perform
external worship without internal awareness.69 Furthermore, the
‘non-dualism’ of the practitioner identifying himself with the deity
in ritual procedure is common to all Tantras, including explicitly
dualist texts. We shall see in the following section how such iden-
tiﬁcation is the internalisation of the text and does not necessarily
reﬂect a metaphysical non-dualism. Indeed, as Sanderson observes,
texts that are primarily concerned with ritual are implicitly dualistic.
He writes:
     Certainly dualism is more natural to the Tantras considered in their
     primary character as a system of rites and meditations. Nondualism,
     I suggest, connotes, just as it does in orthodox Hindu thinking about
     the Vedic revelation, an undermining or subordination of the ritualism
     that inspired these systems. It is a metaview of a complex of practices
     that suggests their ultimate superﬂuity and therefore is hardly likely
     to have been the basic theoretical attitude of those who elaborated the
     mainstream tradition.70

This is surely right. It does indeed make sense that elaborate ritual
systems that imply a structure, and the notion of a goal to be
achieved that is implicitly or explicitly separate from oneself, are
not metaphysical non-dualists. As Sanderson observes, a non-dualist
metaphysics undermines a ritual structure that implies within it
distinction and separation in the ritual process. One could perhaps
argue that soteriological ritual, as in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, implies
dualism or pluralism in the sense that this procedure is thought to
transport the self through the cosmos to its freedom. When the
ritual process is aligned with cosmological unfolding and contraction,
there is clearly the implication that this cosmos creates a distance
between self and cosmic origin, or between self and its freedom
from entanglement in the cosmogonic process. Ritual in the ˆaiva
revelation implies a structured path to the goal of liberation. For
the metaphysical dualists there is no problem with this, but for
the non-dualists there is, in the sense that the self ’s identity with
consciousness undermines any notion of separation between self
and goal.
                       The Tantric Revelation                          

    That the Tantras are mainly dualist in their metaphysics is further-
more attested by the strong inﬂuence of S®m. khya. The S®m. khya
tradition maintains a strict dualism between self and matter or nature
and describes the unfolding of matter in terms of categories, the
tattvas, which are fundamental to the tantric texts. We cannot under-
stand the Tantras without reference to the S®m. khya system. Indeed,
the ˆaiva Siddh®nta could be said to be almost purely samkhyan in
its metaphysics, with the addition of a transcendent theistic reality. In
S®m. khya the self is entangled, or appears to be entangled, in nature
and the goal of practice is to free the self from such entanglement
and to experience its isolation (kaivalya) both from nature and from
other selves.71 This is not dissimilar to the Saiddh®ntika view that at
liberation the self becomes distinct from nature, from power (˜akti),
and realises itself to be a ˆiva, equal to ˆiva but ontologically distinct
and distinct from other selves. For the ˆaiva Siddh®nta the tantric
revelation is intended to show bound souls the way to this freedom
and knowledge out of entanglement in matter. Through the initiation
and the ritual procedure revealed, along with the grace of ˆiva, the
self can cleanse itself of the substance of impurity and, in a way not
dissimilar to Jainism, for whom karma is a substance, through this
puriﬁcation rise through the hierarchy of the cosmos to its liberation.
For the monist, of course, this way of speaking is ultimately simply
a façon de parler, for in truth liberation is the recognition of identity
with consciousness, a truth revealed in scripture and understood in
one’s own experience (sv®nubhava).
    The tantric revelation is primarily concerned with ritual closely
linked to cosmology. Sometimes the metaphysics of the texts are
explicitly dualistic, as in the ˆaiv®gamas of the Siddh®nta, and
sometimes the metaphysics are not, in which case the texts are open
to monistic interpretations by the ˆaiva idealists. This lack of a
developed concern with philosophy and argument in the Tantras
suggests that doctrine is subordinate to the practical concerns of
ritual and, in some cases, yoga and meditation. It is not to the
epistemological discourse in Indian thinking that we should look to
make sense of these texts but rather to the cosmological discourse
of S®m. khya and its implied yogic dimensions along with ritual
procedures whose origins lie in Brahmanical, vedic ritualism. The
                       The Tantric Body

M¬m®m. sakas maintained that the most important thing about the
Veda was the injunction to act, to perform ritually. We might say that
in a parallel way the most important thing about the Tantras is their
injunctive force, that they impel their adherents to ritual action as
being more important than philosophical speculation, and that this
ritual action is the internalisation of the text, the internalisation of
tradition, and the forming of the self in text-speciﬁc ways. It is to
the details of this process that we must now turn.
                              

                   Tantric Civilisation




T      texts and ideas became increasingly inﬂuential from the
      earlier centuries of the common era through to their expansion
in the tenth, eleventh and twelfth centuries, and, although these
traditions became attenuated largely due to Muslim polities in South
Asia, their impact was nevertheless felt into the nineteenth century
and into later modernity. We might even speak of ‘tantric civilisation’
ﬂowering during the medieval period before the rise of the hegemony
of the Delhi Sultanate and continuing after this in the South and in
Nepal. While the concept of civilisation arose with the development
of historical consciousness in the West,1 it is nevertheless a term
that can be meaningfully applied elsewhere, and we might take it
simply as shorthand for the operation of macro-cultural forces. While
the focus of this book is on the micro- rather than the macro-level
of culture, in looking at texts and their expression in practice we
nevertheless need to pay attention to the broader historical contexts
in which these texts and practices have arisen and to propose ways
that the micro-structure of the internalisation of tantric revelation
articulates with broader social and political forces in so far as the
body, or more speciﬁcally its divinisation, is the root metaphor of
tantric civilisation.
                         The Tantric Body

    We can take ‘civilisation’ to be a broader concept than ‘society’
in that a civilisation might contain a number of social systems and
unlike a social system is not teleological: a civilisation is not functional
in the way that a society is in directly maintaining the speciﬁcity
of power relations such as a particular kinship system and family
dynamics. But perhaps, unlike ‘culture’, a civilisation entails a polity
or structural politics that articulates with culture and social structure
and is geographically located over a particular spatial area. There
are Sanskrit analogues for the term ‘civilisation’ such as §ry®varta
in the older literature, the homeland of the Aryans, an area to the
north of the Vindhya mountains, which is contrasted to the land of
‘barbarians’ (mleccha) outside of this. §ry®varta is the land of ritual
action (karmabh‚mi) where liberation is possible and where dharma
is maintained.2 There are also terms for reﬁnement, politeness and
sophistication implied by ‘civilisation’, such as sabhya, ‘being at
court’ or reﬁned and courteous, and su˜¬la, ‘cultured’. Although there
is no direct translation of ‘tantric civilisation’, it nevertheless conveys
the important idea that the tantric traditions had historical depth, a
textual semantic density, and ideas expressed in art and in polity. Not
only are the Tantras and their traditions concerned with individual
practice leading to the personal goals of power and/or liberation,
they are concerned with broader culture and political developments,
particularly the building of temples and, closely related to this, the
legitimising of kings.
    Tantric civilisation arose within what Sheldon Pollock has called
the ‘Sanskrit cosmopolis’,3 a transcultural formation focused on
Sanskrit as a written, literary language of culture articulated in ‘lit-
erature’ (k®vya) and in the ‘praise poem’ (pra˜asti) found especially
in inscriptions that issued from the courts of kings.4 Imperial forma-
tions bought into this culture – the just king is one who promotes
correct language (s®dhu˜abda)5 – which helped serve to legitimise
their authority although cannot be reduced to this function. But
while on the one hand we have the development of a Sanskrit
cosmopolis throughout South and Southeast Asia during the early
centuries of the common era, on the other hand we have the rise of
vernacular languages as the chosen medium for expressing identity
and ethnicity from around  to  .6 These consciously
                         Tantric Civilisation                          

deﬁned themselves in relation to the Sanskritic model; Pollock has
illustrated this in some detail in relation to Kannada, as has Freeman
with the development of Malayalam literature.7 It is against this
general cultural-linguistic background that we need to understand
the rise of the Tantras, particularly the fact that they were written
in Sanskrit at a time when regional vernaculars were developing.
In many texts this Sanskrit is not polished and highly literate, a
peculiarity characterised as ‘divine’ (ai˜a), which suggests that these
texts’ authors and redactors were not completely at home in this
milieu but nevertheless thought it imperative to locate these texts
and traditions within the wider, ‘high’ literary culture of the Sanskrit
cosmopolis; we see the success of this strategy in writers such as
Abhinavagupta who were not only t®ntrikas but aesthetes, deeply
immersed in literary culture. While the great ediﬁce of Sanskrit
literature and traditions cannot be reduced to a means of articulating
and legitimising political authority in medieval India, this literature
nevertheless did express and legitimate an ideology of kingship that
sees polity as the expression of divine power along with the expres-
sion of that power in the construction of temples. The Tantras play
into this structure. Although the legitimising of kings is not their
main, overt concern, they came to be used in this way. The tantric
texts are part of the Sanskrit cosmopolis and as such must also be
seen in the context of literature that expresses values encapsulated
in the ‘goals of life’ (puru◊®rtha) on the one hand, and the rise of
the vernaculars on the other. Indeed, Tantrism did have an impact
on vernacular devotionalism (bhakti), especially in its erotic, Vai◊n. ava
forms, and tantric civilisation is evident at popular, village level where
tantric deities, especially ferocious goddesses and guardians, become
important for the life of the community. The cultural, religious and
political history of India in the medieval period cannot be understood
without Tantra. David White is surely correct in maintaining that
‘Tantra has been the predominant religious paradigm, for over a
millennium, of the great majority of the inhabitants of the Indian
subcontinent. It has been the background against which Indian reli-
gious civilisation has evolved.’8 The root metaphor of this civilisation
is arguably the body, or more speciﬁcally the divinisation of the body
which is its entextualisation.
                       The Tantric Body

     The Divinisation of the Body as Root Metaphor

The body needs to be understood in terms of both representation and
lived experience. As representation, on the one hand, it provides the
model for the hierarchical universe and the ways of mapping the self,
and, on the other, it is the means of experiencing a world structured
by text and tradition. In both representation and in experience the
central theme of tantric civilisation is the body’s divinisation. This
divinisation of the body is a way in which the body can be said to
become the text and which operates at a number of levels. At the level
of individual practice, the body of the practitioner becomes divine
through ritual construction in text-speciﬁc ways (as I demonstrate
with particular examples). In the political realm the body of the
king becomes divine through ritual construction which parallels the
divinisation of the deity in the temple. The temple as the analogue
of the palace is the body of the deity. Indeed, as the god is to the
temple, which itself reﬂects deity and cosmos, so the king is to the
body politic and palace. At a popular, often low-caste, level the body
becomes divine in possession (®ve˜a). Indeed, Rich Freeman has put
forward an argument to say that possession is the common theme that
uniﬁes the tantric body, linked to language, especially performative
utterance.9 But certainly in English the term ‘possession’ has nega-
tive connotations and we might argue that, rather, divinisation is a
more accurate term to describe a process that occurs at a number
of cultural levels where its function also differs. For the practitioner
seeking liberation the divinisation of the body is a necessary ritual
step in the existential realisation of that truth; for the king the
divinisation of the body is political empowerment by the deity and
the legitimisation of his regime – divinisation enlivens the temple
and its deities; and for the low-caste divinisation is possession which
can be an empowerment and the bestowing of voice for someone
otherwise voiceless, although it can also simply mean illness.
   These processes of divinisation are made somewhat complex by
the tension between ‘institutionalised Tantra’ and ‘transgressive
Tantra’ (which roughly map on to Samuel’s priestly and shamanic
forms). The latter, much of the material contained in the Bhairava
and Tantras of the Southern transmission, has emphasised those
                        Tantric Civilisation                        

scriptures that transcend the orthodox revelation of the Veda whose
practices transgress orthodox dharma, particularly in the emphasis on
eroticism in worship and the violence of its deities. But this violence
and eroticism quickly become incorporated within institutionalised
Tantra, particularly where political power is concerned. Indeed,
Tantrism becomes orthodox through ofﬁcial patronage as much as
through Brahmanical incorporation. Through institutionalisation,
sacred violence and eroticism become cultural tropes articulated
in text and art, and contained in high tantric ritual. Of particular
importance here is the temple. Many Tantras, notably the ˆaiva
Siddh®nta Tantras and Up®gamas, contain long sections on temple
building, the installation of icons in temples, and temple worship.
There are also texts speciﬁcally devoted to tantric temple archi-
tecture, such as the Mayamata,10 the D¬pt®gama11 and ˆilpaprak®˜a,12
and some Tantras such as the Ajit®gama and Rauravottar®gama have
signiﬁcant sections given over to temple architecture and the instal-
lation of icons. These texts described different designs for temples
and prescribe the deities to be installed, such as what deities are to
                                      .
be placed on the temple façades (din m‚rti).13
    The current section therefore proposes to broaden the para-
meters of the discussion to examine the relevance of the body as
the internalisation of text in terms of polity, temple art and popular
religion, speciﬁcally possession. I intend to pursue two interrelated
lines of argument to show that when tantric rites are injected
into the pre-existent structure of kingship, the king becomes the
analogue of the tantric Brahman, and to show that this needs to
be understood in terms of the model in tantric revelation of the
internalisation of the text. The divinisation of the body is applied
to the king. We must conclude from this the primacy of the body
as an index of tradition-speciﬁc subjectivity and the primacy of
revelation and its internalisation in any understanding of tantric
civilisation. Clearly there are macro-cultural forces at work, such
as economic constraints, trade and caste, in the creation of what
Inden has called ‘imperial formation’ in the medieval period,14 but
important here is that sovereignty is mediated through revelation,
through the structure of internalisation and entextualisation. The
internalisation of revelation, the body becoming deiﬁed through the
                      The Tantric Body

mediation of text and tradition, is the primary tantric model at the
base of tantric civilisation, which can be demonstrated in the three
realms of polity, temple sculpture and possession.

                          Tantric Polity
Kingship in the medieval period was formed by historical contin-
gency and justiﬁed by textual tradition. From the early medieval
period to the rise of the Delhi Sultanate, the history of India
is characterised in political terms by the development of feudal
kingdoms and of the increasing awareness of regional identity with
the rise of important regional centres focused on temples and the
development of region-speciﬁc styles of art and architecture. After
the collapse of the Gupta empire and generally from the mid-
eighth century, kingdoms such as those of the R®◊ﬂrak‚ﬂas in the
Deccan, an early form of the Rajputs called the Gurjura-Prat¬h®ras
of M®lava-Rajasthan, and the P®las of Bengal, were engaged in bitter
rivalry; kings and princes pursued policies of military adventurism
and an ideology of warfare developed, which became, in Davidson’s
phrase, ‘a facet of the erotic play of king, who was understood as
the manifestation of a divinity’.15 The king, as divine, was the male
consort of the land represented by the Goddess.16 Tribal and clan
power developed during this period, with Brahmans being given land
in return for legitimising the new rulers and instigating a process of
Sanskritisation whereby local customs and deities became integrated
into the overarching, Brahmanical paradigm.
   One example is the Candella clan of the Gond tribe, which built
the famous temples of Khajuraho. They wielded considerable power
and inﬂuence and could, for example, reinstate to his throne their
nominal Prat¬h®ra overlord, Mah¬p®la (c. ).17 In the Deccan the
most important dynasties to develop were the Chalukya and the Cola
empire (c. – ), which replaced the Pallavas, although it was
the Pallavas who exported the cult of the divine king to Southeast
Asia in the kingdom of Fu-nan, which fell to the Khmers. Indeed,
Indic kingdoms continued to develop in Southeast Asia with the
Indonesian empire of the ˆailendras, of Orissan origin, establishing
settlements as far as Bali and Java. A Cambodian inscription dated
                         Tantric Civilisation                          

to   (ˆ®ka era ) refers to the introduction of Tantras
into the Khmer kingdom during the reign of Jayavarman II, of
particular importance being the continuation of texts of the left
current, eliminated from India, in Cambodia and Java. We know
of these from the Cambodian Sdok kak Thom inscription.18 With
the Colas we see the development of Tamil culture and the growth
of the extraordinary temple cities of Thanjavur (the Cola capital),
Cidambaram, Darasuram and Gangaikondacolapuram, whose ˆaiva
temples demonstrate not only an impressive imperial power but
a thriving, Brahmanical, §gamic culture. By contrast in Kashmir
tantric culture faded from around  to  , during which time
Kashmir was under almost constant Muslim rule and the majority
of the population turned to Islam.19
   These medieval kingdoms shared an ideology of divine kingship:
that the king was a deity or manifestation of a deity. As Davidson
observes, the corollary to this was ‘the feudalisation of divinity,
wherein the gods became perceived as warlords and the rulers of the
earth’.20 The king is not merely a ‘secular’ ruler but a divine king, a
god incarnate, as expressed in the very term deva, which can mean
both deity and king. As Hocart has argued, the king became the high
point of the social structure identiﬁed with the sun, with the rest of
society below. Ofﬁcialdom is equated with lesser gods of the sky, and
the queen is identiﬁed with the earth. The commoners beneath this
also formed part of this total structure.21 What Inden calls a ‘world
ordering rationality’ becomes integral to Hindu kingship, so ‘that
the divinity of that kingship can be seen as an issue of “reason”
and “will” in the formation and re-formation of political societies
in ancient India.’22 Kingship gave order to the world, and a world
without a king (ar®jaka) was in chaos.23 We must also remember
that the medieval Hindu kingdom was not like a European kingdom.
Rather, as Burton Stein has shown, it was segmentary in character,
comprising a number of embedded socio-political structures that
formed a pyramid. This hierarchy meant that the village was embed-
ded within the locality, the locality within the supralocality, and that
within the kingdom. Within this structure, lesser kings paid ritual
obeisance to higher, more powerful ones.24 Tantric notions of king-
ship are therefore easily injected into this already existing institution.
                        The Tantric Body

Although the idea of divine kingship has been criticised, especially in
a postcolonial context, we do need to maintain this notion in order to
understand kingship and its legitimisation in the tantric context.
   According to dharma literature the functions of the king are the
protection of the people, the maintaining of social order through the
maintenance of caste boundaries, and the administration of justice.
The king is also the patron of ritual, who assumes the classical,
vedic role of the patron of the sacriﬁce (yajamana).25 In Manu’s
terms the king is the protector of caste (varn. a) and dharmic stages
of life (®˜rama).26 But the new tantric conception of kingship saw the
king as a deity warrior whose power is derived from the violent and
erotic warrior goddesses worshipped as the retinue of a deity such
as Bhairava, located at a particular level of revelation. The power of
the king was linked to the power of the Goddess or goddesses and
this power endowed at coronation or through tantric initiations by
specialist priests. Indeed, through consecration and initiation these
kings sought legitimacy from the textual traditions and sought to
derive power through their identiﬁcation with deities and use of their
mantras.27 There are certainly continuities with more ancient concep-
tions of kingship – even in the Laws of Manu the king is regarded as
embodying fragments of the gods28 – but with the medieval period a
new sense of divinity and an aggressive, power-hungry lordship came
into play that sought legitimacy from theology. The erotic violence
of the Goddess is contained within the king and controlled through
a political structure that is scripturally and ritually legitimated. This
legitimacy and new concept of kingship were achieved in the ﬁrst
instance through texts of secondary revelation, the ‘ancient texts’
or Pur®n. as formally concerned with the ﬁve topics of cosmogony
(sarga), the regeneration of the cosmos (pratisarga), the genealogy
of populations (vam. ˜a), the great epochs of Manu (manvantara),
and the genealogy of kings (vam. ˜®nucarita).29 An important text that
exempliﬁes this, studied by Inden, is the Vi◊n. udharmottara-pur®n. a.
Inden shows how this text expressed P®ñcar®tra or tantric Vai◊n. ava
theology. While the text is not a Tantra, rather locating itself at the
apex of a ‘scale of texts’ within the Puranic, orthodox tradition,30 it
nevertheless embodies the theology of tantric Vai◊n. avism. In contrast
to the Pur®n. as, few tantric texts show explicit concern for the nature
                        Tantric Civilisation                        

of kingship – although texts such as the Netra-tantra may well be
from courtly circles – yet the ideal of kingship is directly inﬂuenced
by them in the medieval period, as Davidson31 and White32 have
shown. The focus of the Tantras, as we have seen, is on daily and
occasional rituals, the formation of mantras, cosmology, the instal-
lation of icons, and temple building. But the inﬂuence of a tantric
ideology of power is deeply embedded in medieval ideas of kingship,
and the Pur®n. as themselves are inﬂuenced by Tantrism,33 although it
is also true that orthodox Brahmans maintained a distance between
themselves and dangerous or deﬁling tantric mantras.
    The impact of Tantrism on kingship extends from India through
to Southeast Asia. At the heart of the tantric idea of kingship is
the ritual diagram, the man. ¥ala, where the deity and his consort
are surrounded by a retinue of deities who are themselves emana-
tions or belonging within the same sphere, clan or lineage. The
classical model is thus the lord of the clan Kule˜vara and his consort
Kule˜var¬, surrounded by goddesses such as the eight mothers (see
pp. –). The king is the analogue of Kule˜vara and his queen,
from whom he derives power through sex, the analogue of Kule˜var¬.
Power ﬂows from her to the king to the deities of the clan and so to
the wider community.34 White has convincingly argued that under-
lying this structure are the goddesses of clans and land, and the
formation of alliances between ruling families is important in this
understanding. At one level the king is identiﬁed with the high god
Vi◊n. u or ˆiva and so transcends particular political alliances within
the kingdom, while the tutelary goddesses represent connections to
land and powerful ruling families, who ‘ratiﬁed and energised the
pragmatic religious life of the kingdom as a whole’.35 This mandalic
model of kingship can be seen in Nepal, as Tofﬂin has shown,
where three gods are important for royalty and from them the king
derives his power: the sovereign god Vi◊n. u; the master of ascet-
ics and of Nepal, Pa˜upati; and the secret tantric goddess, Taleju.
Indeed, among the Newars of Nepal the power of the Goddess lies
in royalty.36 The most important tantric rite connected with kingship
is the king’s consecration or anointing (abhi◊eka) and Davidson
has shown the connection between royal consecration and tantric
initiation.37 The Jay®khya-sam. hit® interestingly links the anointing
                        The Tantric Body

(abhi◊eka) of four classes of initiate with four kinds of political actor.
Thus the procedures for the samayin, putraka, s®dhaka and ®c®rya
(see pp. –) are to be modelled on the procedures for anointing a
military general (senapati), a prime minister (mah®mantrin), a prince
(yuvar®ja) and a king (r®ja).38 Here we have an explicit identiﬁcation
of the procedure of anointing with political institution, with the
king analogous to the master (®c®rya); as the master embodies the
divinity disclosed by the text, so does the king disclose the divinity.
There is documentary evidence that kings were consecrated with
tantric mantras, at Viyajanagara,39 for example, and an early king of
Nepal, a practice which continued into modernity.40 These tantric
rites of anointing at coronation using tantric mantras ﬁtted easily
into an ideology of divine kingship and simply injected a further
layer of textual empowerment into the pre-existing puranic scheme.
The transgressive violence and eroticism of tantric deities become
tapped and controlled by the institution of kingship. That this
layer of further empowerment was regarded with suspicion by the
orthodox in the case of Kashmir is clear from a number of sources
(such as Jayanthabhaﬂﬂa’s play, §gama¥ambara, which we have cited
(pp. –)), but it is also the case that kingship was supported by
wholly orthodox Brahmans using Pur®n. as as their core texts, as
Inden has shown, but whose theology was tantric, as in the case of
the P®ñcar®tra Vi◊n. udharmottara.
   Some passages in tantric texts deal directly with kingship. The
Netra-tantra states that the tantric teacher (®c®rya) needs to worship
the eight mothers for the protection of king and kingdom. He should
construct a ‘lotus’ diagram for appeasement, prosperity, good luck,
protection of women and sons, and for the protection of the king
and intimidation of other rival kings. The teacher should use mantras
for the well-being of the king, for his protection from illness, his
happy sleep and good digestion.41 The ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati
contains some material on kingship and it undoubtedly assumes that
its teachings are for royalty as well as for initiated ˆaivas. We see
this in the chapter on battles and in the extensive sections on temple
building and temple architecture. Only kings, with their armies, go to
war and, while others build temples too, it is kings who build large,
prestigious temples that glorify the deity and thereby themselves.
                        Tantric Civilisation                        

In the chapter on protection in a battle, the text presents ﬁve birds
connected with the ﬁve actions of ˆiva (see p. ) and with different
mantric syllables. These birds are furthermore related to ﬁve stages in
the king’s life, namely childhood, youth, kingship, old age and death,
which in turn are related to ﬁve activities of enjoyment, sacriﬁce,
marching to war, ruling, retirement or the cessation of action, and
dying.42 Through studying the omens of birds we can determine
the positive or negative outcome of a battle for a particular person,
who should prepare accordingly by, for example, wearing armour
for good bodily protection (suguptadeha) or dividing his wealth if
the augury is pessimistic.43
   Through consecration the king becomes the analogue of the
tantric Brahman. As the divinisation of the body is described in
the texts, so the king’s body is divinised in consecration, and as the
body of the practitioner becomes an index of a tradition-speciﬁc
subjectivity, so the king’s becomes an index of the wider social body.
In a way not dissimilar to medieval Europe,44 the king’s body points
to the health of the society as a whole. In one sense the king is
the ideal householder who can fulﬁl the goals of dharma in the
projection of the people, artha, the pursuance of wealth and politi-
cal success, and k®ma, the pursuance of pleasure, especially sexual
pleasure with courtesans; in another sense he is like the Brahman
in mediating transcendent power and, indeed, himself becoming
divinised. The king absorbs the violent and erotic power of the
divine and transforms it into political strategies of expansion and
consolidation. This becoming divinised is a formal empowerment
through the king’s ritual anointing in which power descends upon
him. The body of the king becomes a divine body, as the body
of the practitioner becomes divine through initiation (and every
day following that). As the practitioner’s, the king’s body becomes
entextualised through tradition-speciﬁc mantras.

                      The Tantric Temple

While the primary and most important forms of tantric deities are
always as mantras rather than as plastic representations, there is
nevertheless signiﬁcant overlap between tantric and puranic texts
                        The Tantric Body

in the areas of temple-building and iconography. As the body of
the king becomes divinised in the rite of anointing, so the temple
deity becomes enlivened through the appropriate rites (as in stand-
ard temple Hinduism). The divine body of the king in the palace
recapitulates the divine body of the deity in the temple and there
is a parallelism between the temple and the palace, as Tofﬂin has
shown existed in Nepal to recent times.45 Temples are an important
concern in tantric literature, and texts of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta contain
much material on the construction of temples, installation of deities,
and temple rites. The Rauravottar®gama describes different kinds
of temple styles, octagonal (dr®vi¥a), circular (vesara) and square
(n®gara), along with the deities to be installed.46 The text describes
                                                     .
the installation of the main deity, the ˆiva lin ga on its pedestal
(p¬ﬂha), the installation of the Goddess and her marriage to ˆiva,
and the installation of the guardians of the doors (dv®rap®la),47
descriptions which, with some variation, are found in other Tantras
as well. Temple tantrism continues into present times in temples
of Tamil Nadu and, especially, Kerala where ‘tantric Hinduism’
is normative, some Nambudiri families using the ﬁfteenth-century
Tantrasamuccaya as their base text.48 Even the more extreme cults
of goddesses, the Yogin¬s, were expressed in temples during the
early medieval period, as White has shown.49 In line with orthodox,
puranic tradition, such temples can be seen as the body of the deity,
and indeed when discussing the temple the distinction between the
tantric and non-tantric becomes blurred. The great ˆaiva temple at
Cidambaram, for example, a centre of orthodox power and learning,
performed temple rites according to ˆaiva Siddh®nta texts, yet there
were also non-dualist theologians such as Mahe˜var®nanda writing
against dualist interpretations of scripture within the institution of
that temple.50
   Along with guardians and protectors, temple façades of the medi-
eval period are famous for their erotic sculpture, which is the focus
of wide interest and often associated with ‘Tantrism’ and ‘tantric
art’, especially in the West, because it seems to disrupt the Western
disjunction between ‘religion’ and ‘sexuality’. Indeed, the presence of
erotic sculpture associated with Tantrism has reinforced the idea of
later tantric culture that bhukti is mukti, pleasure is liberation, and, in
                         Tantric Civilisation                         

the Kul®rn. ava-tantra, bhoga is yoga, pleasure is the method.51 But to
begin to understand these images we must look to their context and
the systems of value operative at the time of their composition.


                  Tantra and Erotic Sculpture

Both the terms mukti and bhukti point to values within the history
of Indian civilisation that are in tension. Pleasure, particularly sexual
pleasure or k®ma, has a long history as one of the four legitimate
goals of life (puru◊®rtha) along with dharma, prosperity (artha) and
liberation (mok◊a). While one of the key texts of tradition, the
Bhagavad-g¬t®, is virtually silent on the subject of k®ma, as Killingley
observes,52 it is nevertheless treated systematically and deeply in other
literatures, most notably the k®ma˜®stra, of which the most famous
text is the K®mas‚tra. This literature rejoices in sexual pleasure and,
though it may seem mechanistic in relation to Sanskrit erotic poetry
and even sexist to contemporary Western sensibilities, demonstrates
the importance and legitimacy that sexual desire was perceived to
have in classical Indian civilisation before the rise of Islam and
the advent of puritanical colonialism. Liberation, by contrast, was
traditionally a transcendent (vi˜vott¬rn. a) state achieved by world re-
nouncers through asceticism and celibacy; the reversal of the ﬂow of
the body outwards towards the objects of desire. Sanskrit literature is
replete with sages falling from their austerities due to being seduced
by beautiful women, usually sent by gods such as Indra fearing the
power created by their abstinence and austerity,53 demonstrating the
tension between cultural values and the difﬁculty in transcending
worldly concerns. Dumont highlighted two realms of value, that of
the householder and the renouncer.54 While we might dispute who
precisely is a householder and whether the Brahman is closer to the
renouncer than to Dumont’s ‘man-in-the-world’, the distinction does
nevertheless point to an aporia in Indian civilisation. Part of the
ideology of tantric traditions, particularly the more philosophical
accounts, is that liberation and the world-afﬁrming value of desire
are not incompatible, but desire can be used to transcend desire. It
is precisely here that the difference between desire in wider Indian
                       The Tantric Body

civilisation and tantric traditions can be seen. For the k®ma˜®stra
pleasure, the result of desire (the term k®ma can mean both ‘pleasure’
and ‘desire’), is an end in itself. Sexual pleasure has no goal in this
context other than its own fulﬁlment. In contrast to the ideal and
value of dharma, where having children is a purpose with a high
priority, the purpose of k®ma is not children but pleasure for its
own sake. In this sense k®ma is barren and indeed transgressive of
dharma. Pleasure rather than progeniture is the goal.
   Although much is often made of desire in Tantrism, in the
k®ma˜®stric sense, it is distinct from its tantric use, although the
boundaries between tantric and non-tantric k®ma have sometimes
been blurred even within the tradition itself. As White has shown
(as we will see in Chapter ) in early tantric traditions of the ex-
treme left, sexual desire was used to produce sexual ﬂuids, power
substances, that were to be offered to the deities of the man. ¥ala.55
We also ﬁnd in these extreme texts the advocation of consuming
bodily waste products, and one thinks here particularly of extreme
Buddhist Tantras such as the Can. ¥amah®ro◊ana-tantra where waste
products are to be consumed as the diet ‘eaten by all the Buddhas’
without ‘even slight disgust’.56 All bodily products are thought to
contain power potentially through their transgressive use in a ritual
context.57 Only in later tantric traditions does k®ma come to be
regarded as itself a means of transformation to the condition of
the deity. Thus we have a shift from the appeasement of ferocious
and erotic deities with the ‘sacriﬁce’ of sexual substances to the
practice of sexual union in a ritual context as the transformation
of desire such that the experience of coition is thought to reﬂect or
recapitulate the bliss of ˆiva and ˆakti. We also have the use of sex
to produce sexual ﬂuids, which are then contracted back into the
male partner in an often elaborate rite, the vajrol¬ mudr®.58 In both
of these senses k®ma is different from the k®ma of the k®ma˜®stra.
In the tantric traditions of the left k®ma is not an end in itself but
a means to an end; desire used to transcend itself as a thorn can
be removed by a thorn, or perfection attained by those things that
would normally lead one to fall from the path, in the image of the
Kul®rn. ava-tantra.59 And the strong links between eroticism and death
place sexual desire in Tantrism even further from the k®ma˜®stras. In
                          Tantric Civilisation                           

Shulman’s words, Tantrism presents a ‘barren eroticism’.60 Indeed,
the extreme antinomian practices of the left cannot be seen in terms
of pleasure; as Hardy points out, there are other occasions where
promiscuity could take place on festival occasions such as holi.61
   Conceptually the distinction between k®ma in the Tantras and
k®ma in erotic science is clear in the former being teleological (its
goal being power and/or liberation) and the latter being an end
in itself, but some blurring of the boundary does occur. A notable
feature of the magniﬁcent temples of medieval India is the erotic
scenes sculpted on the temple walls known to gawking tourists and
giggling schoolchildren. These have often been taken as paradigmatic
of ‘tantric art’, but, given that ‘tantric eroticism’ is of a distinct kind,
do these sculptures have any relation to tantric civilisation and, if so,
what could it be? This is a difﬁcult question, to which a number of
responses have been made, such as that they are protective against
demonic powers, that they reﬂect what goes on in the heavens, or
that they are depictions of tantric ritual activity.
   Erotic sculpture on medieval and later temples is a common
feature, still seen on temples in the South, though little remains in
the North, largely due to temples being destroyed. One interesting
and plausible theory put forward by Fred Hardy, ﬁrst expressed
to him by people in a temple’s environs, is that the sculptures are
intended to keep demons away from the pure sanctuary, acting as
mirrors to reﬂect the demons’ obscenity back on themselves.62 Given
that the universe was peopled with supernatural powers, both aus-
picious and inauspicious, and the temple was considered to be a
pure abode of the deity, this is a highly plausible thesis. Indeed, the
façades of temples contain the pantheons of deities that form the
outer wall (®varan. a) of the main deity’s power, namely the guardians
of the directions and the guardians of the doors. Erotic sculpture
ﬁts well into this context of magical protection. However, this is not
attested in any texts and at least one text, the ˆilpa-prak®˜a, links
such sculptures with the k®ma˜®stra (see below). Moreover, many of
these sculptures have very great elegance and beauty, and one would
perhaps expect the grotesque to function in this way rather than the
beautiful. White, on the other hand, has argued that there is indeed
a connection between Tantrism and the coital couples (maithunas) of
                        The Tantric Body

erotic temple sculpture, pointing out that there are ruins of Yogin¬
temples scattered across the central Indian region where Kaula prac-
tices were performed in the royal courts. With special reference to the
Bheraghat Yogin¬ temple in Orissa, White argues that the maithunas
on the sides of early temples in all likelihood depict tantric rituals
because they appear to follow a sequence.63 Such depictions only
lasted for a comparatively short duration (White thinks no more than
two hundred years), after which time the maithuna motif becomes
decontextualised from its ritual origin. In other words, we might say
that erotic depictions shift from representations of tantric sexuality,
which therefore point to the transcendence of sex as action for its
own sake, to depictions of sex more in keeping with k®ma˜®stra.
Either way, whether these representations are linked to trangressive
tantric practice or to k®ma˜®stra, this points against their being linked
to ‘fertility cults’ other than in a very broad and general way.64
    This is clearly the case by the time of the composition of the
ˆilpa-prak®˜a, a text of temple architecture composed by a tantric
practitioner, judging by his name, R®macandra Kul®c®ra, between
the ninth and twelfth centuries in Orissa.65 This text describes the
building of a temple as parts of the deity’s body, the deity being
the foundational god Mah®puru◊a. What is of note is that the text
clearly links the temple with the idea of desire and with the science
of erotics, the k®ma˜®stra. Desire (k®ma) is the root of the universe,
says the text, from which all things are born, and through desire all
is reabsorbed into primordial matter (m‚labh‚ta). ‘Without ˆiva and
ˆakti creation would be mere illusion. Without the action of desire
(k®makriy®) there would be no life, birth and death.’66 This is to place
desire as the most important goal of life, and so is in accord with a
strong theme in Sanskrit literature. Moreover the text links maithuna
couples with the k®ma˜®stra, saying that there should not be represen-
tations of sexual union (sam. ghama) but only depictions of love play
as there are many types of love play in the k®ma˜®stra.67 Of course,
the truth of temple sculpture goes against this recommendation as
there are innumerable examples of fully coital representations on
temple walls, including scenes involving multiple actors. The ‘orgy’
scenes on the sides of Khajuraho or Konarak are against the norms
of dharma but not at variance with k®ma˜®stra, and, indeed, there
                        Tantric Civilisation                         

are occasions of ‘orgiastic’ worship contained in some texts.68 But
what is signiﬁcant is that maithuna couples are here directly linked
to the k®ma˜®stra, an important shift in relocating eroticism to a
context of aesthetics. With the erotic carvings on temple walls, eroti-
cism is stripped of its violence and link with death that we ﬁnd in
early tantric appeasement and taboo breaking. The depiction of the
body on temple walls is a representation of the body in an idealised
eroticism that is grounded in text; an eroticism which rejoices in the
body yet which points beyond itself to a divine transcendence. The
body’s representation here is divinised and textualised in a way that
goes beyond transgression or protection. Indeed such representation
points to the sexualised body as a manifestation of the deity, as other
deities on temple façades are manifestations: the temple is the body
of the deity and is not devoid of sexuality.


                             Possession

As the divinisation of the body occurs at the level of the individual
practitioner, in the body of the king, and, in an extended sense, with
the temple, so the same topos occurs in possession and exorcism and
even in popular devotion (bhakti). Indeed, if anything is characteristic
of popular religion in India it is possession. It would be possible
to read the history of religion in South Asia in terms of posses-
sion as the central paradigm of a person being entered by a deity
which becomes reinterpreted at more ‘reﬁned’ cultural levels. We
see this with the term sam®ve˜a, whose primary designation is, like
®ve˜a, ‘possession’, coming from the root vi˜, ‘to enter’, but which
comes to mean ‘immersion’ in non-dual consciousness for the ˆaiva
theologian Abhinavagupta.69 The whole idea of the self becoming
brahman, the very term vipra, ‘shaker’, as a term for a Brahman and
ritualised divinisation through initiation and consecration (abhi◊eka)
might be seen as pointing to this foundational, recurring topos.
Indeed, Rich Freeman’s thesis is that institutionalized possession
is a central paradigm of worship which is anciently attested from
           .
Tamil Cankam literature of the early centuries of the common era.70
Clearly possession is a fundamental trope in the history of Indian
                       The Tantric Body

religions, but I wish to propose that a more basic metaphor is not
possession per se but rather the body becoming divine through
entextualisation, through the identiﬁcation of the self with the ‘text’
both oral and written.
   Possession has a ‘good’ aspect when the deity enters a performer
and so gives a blessing (dar˜ana) to the assembled community or
makes a prophesy, or a ‘bad’ aspect when possession is uninvited and
manifested as illness, especially illness in children, about which much
of the literature is taken up. Smallpox, for example, was thought to
be due to the hot goddess euphemistically called ˆ¬tal®, ‘the cool one’,
or Mariamman in the South. Possession can be seen as the divinisa-
tion of the body, which is also its entextualisation. In becoming the
host for the deity or supernatural being external to the self, the body
becomes constructed in tradition and text-speciﬁc ways. While the
process and symptoms of possession might be common – even across
cultures – it is the speciﬁcity that is important and that gives the
possession legitimacy for a particular community.71
   A ﬁne example of this is the public, costumed, ritual possession
of the teyyam dancers of Kerala, described by Rich Freeman. These
rites continue to the present day, and Freeman has provided an
excellent ethnography of the tradition, showing its historical and
textual depth. These local deities of northern Kerala, each with her
own particular costume and make-up, are danced at annual festivals
by professional dancers who incarnate them. These traditions have
been preserved mainly through oral narratives, and the goddesses
they embody were linked to royal lineages. Indeed, the teyyams are
often apotheosised warrior chiefs and the traditions had royal patron-
age. These rites embody complex caste and gender relationships;
the performers are of a lower caste than the hosts for whom they
perform, and the dancers are exclusively male while the deities are
generally female. The actual performance follows a ritual sequence in
which the castes performing the rites each have their own make-up
rooms; the rites, which take place over several days, become more
elaborate and complex, with a more simple phase (t¨rram) being
followed by a more elaborate one (vel. l. ®ﬂﬂam) and so into the fully
costumed teyyam. I refer the reader to Freeman’s important work on
this, which he links to a general theory of possession in South Asia
                         Tantric Civilisation                          

and to its linguistic mediation. But what I wish to emphasise here
is that the teyyam dancers follow a text; they enact the narrative of
the particular deity and perform the teyyam songs such that the body
becomes the text. Freeman notes that the most signiﬁcant aspect of
the rite is the ritual transformation of the practitioner into the deity.
He describes the process as follows:
   each dancer comes individually before the opened shrine in which
   the priests have been performing p‚ja to receive from them a folded
   banana leaf containing sandalwood paste and a ritual vessel of water
   (kin. ¥i). The dancer uses these to sprinkle himself and daub the paste
   over speciﬁed parts of his body in a prescribed fashion, starting with
   his head and ending at his feet. This sandalwood paste comes from
   the deity and being co-substantial with it, helps to transubstantiate
   the body of the dancer into that of the god. The places the paste is
   daubed are additionally said to correlate with the signiﬁcant nodes
   and portals of the body according to the physiological conceptions of
   tantra, through which the performer absorbs, and is puriﬁed by, the
   divine energy. Some compared this explicitly with the ritualized bodily
   puriﬁcation, the deha-˜uddhi rites of tantric priests.72

The divinisation process culminates in the dancer gazing into a
mirror when the thought arises ‘this is not my form – this is
the actual form of the goddess that I am seeing.’73 Here Freeman
shows how the everyday subject of ﬁrst-person predicates becomes
subsumed by the ﬁrst-person predicate of the deity, who is a being
within a cultural narrative, within a text. The dancer becomes the
deity: to use Urban’s technical terminology, the indexical-I becomes
the ‘I of discourse’ in the text (see pp. –) and the body of the
dancer becomes entextualised. The process we have identiﬁed as
characteristic of tantric traditions, namely the divinisation of the
body as entextualisation, is clearly visible here where the teyyam
dancer is directly linked to tantric conceptions of centres of corporeal
power or cakras, and the puriﬁcation of the body is directly linked
to text and tradition.
   While this is an example of ‘good’ possession, tantric texts and
tantric-inﬂuenced texts are also concerned with ‘bad’ possession,
with illness such as smallpox, madness or trance (unm®da) and
epilepsy (apasmara) caused by malevolent beings who need to be
appeased or acknowledged in some way. Some tantric texts bear
                      The Tantric Body

witness to traditions of possession and exorcism. Three early texts
in particular stand out which seem to bear witness to three distinct,
though arguably interrelated, traditions, namely the Netra-tantra, the
Kum®ra-tantra, and the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati. Other texts also
bear witness to possession and exorcism, such at the ﬁfteenth- or
sixteenth-century Kerala text the Tantras®ra-sam. graha by N®r®yan. a,
concerned with health more generally through mantra and toxicology.
There are also connections between the material on possession in
these texts and broader concerns of Ayurveda, especially the ‘science
of (exorcising) demons’ (bh‚tavidy®). The precise relationship and
intertextuality of all this material is a desideratum. Before this is
done the following comments can be only of a general nature as
pertaining to our theme.74
   The popular ˆaiva cults of the Kashmir valley in the medieval
period, those of the Lord Netra and Svacchandabhairava, both forms
of ˆiva each with their own Tantra (see p. ), contain material on
magical protection, rites for a desired goal (k®mya) such as the de-
struction of enemies or seduction, and possession and exorcism. The
Netra-tantra presents us with a fascinating taxonomy of beings which
need to be appeased to deﬂect possession, which include categories
such as ‘mothers’ (m®tr. k®s) and ‘demon-grabbers’ (bh‚tagraha).
These innumerable beings are classiﬁed by the Netra according to
their desire; thus there are those wanting meat offerings (balik®ma),
those desiring to harm and kill (hantuk®ma) and those wanting sexual
pleasure (bhoktuk®ma).75 These beings are part of the hierarchical
cosmos and each group forms a clan or family (kula) of a higher
deity. By appeasing the higher deity the lower are thereby appeased.
Thus the class of beings called vin®yakas are themselves removed by
worshipping their lord, Vighne˜a (namely Gan. e˜a) by offering him
sweetmeats and plenty of alcohol.76 If someone is possessed by one
of the innumerable ‘mothers’ who wish to harm a person, then the
practitioner needs to perform worship to their source, namely the
seven ‘great mothers’ (mah®m®tr. ), Brahm¬, Mahe˜var¬ and so on,
from whose wombs they originated (see pp. –).77 Once these
higher beings are appeased with offerings of rice, ﬂowers, and four
kinds of meat from domestic and wild, aquatic and ﬂying animals,
then so are the lower manifestations.78
                        Tantric Civilisation                        

   The Netra-tantra presents a tradition of possession and exorcism
which, while having signiﬁcant overlap with other ˆaiva systems,
is nevertheless distinct. The Kum®ra-tantra, which Filliozat thinks
originated in the north and spread to Tibet and Southeast Asia,
contains material on possession by a number of different beings; the
text is particularly important for the anti-demonic rituals it contains
to appease the possessors of children, who give them sickness and
fever. The text presents details of these ritual procedures, which
comprise making offerings (bali), ablutions, fumigation, mantra
repetition and pious works.79 The text details the different kinds of
being that possess children, such as the mothers (m®tr. ), Nandan®,
P‚tan®, Kaﬂap‚tan. a and so on,80 who are made calm (˜®nti) by various
offerings. For example, Kaﬂap‚tan®, who has seized a small child with
a fever, is appeased by making a clay efﬁgy and offering perfumed
betel, good white rice, white ﬂowers, ﬁve standards (dhvaj®Ω), ﬁve
lamps, and ﬁve pulse cakes (vaﬂak®Ω) in the direction of the north-
east, bathing the child with blessed water (˜®ntyudakam), offering
garlands consecrated to ˆiva, a snake skin, incense and so on, along
with the appropriate mantra.81
   There is some overlap between the concerns of the Kum®ra-tantra
and the southern text of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-
paddhati, with one chapter focused on the ˆaiva exorcist deity Kha¥-
gar®van. a considerably overlapping. Here we ﬁnd possession by twelve
mothers (m®tr. k®) or ‘grabbers’ (grah¬) who are within the sphere of
Kha¥gar®van. a, ‘R®van. a with the sword’, who is described in the ISG
as having three heads each with three eyes and with ten arms holding
a skull-topped staff, a trident, a sword, drum, a shield, a skull bowl,
with the fear-not and boon-giving gestures.82 The mothers within his
sphere take away children but can be exorcised according to the same
processes as found in the northern text.83 It would seem then, that
the R®van. a cult existed in the South and indeed the Kum®ra-tantra
does have a Tamil version.84 We are, however, in a different world
with the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati; it contains a distinct typology
of eighteen kinds of supernatural beings,85 the same typology oc-
curring in the Kerala text the Tantras®ra-sam. graha.86 In a way not
dissimilar to the Netra-tantra, ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva groups these beings
into those wanting to harm (hantuk®ma) and those wanting sexual
                        The Tantric Body

pleasure (ratik®ma), who are respectively ﬁerce (agneya) and gentle
(saumya). These innumerable beings, who inhabit remote places such
as rivers, gardens, mountains, lakes, empty places, Buddhist st‚pas,
(deserted?) temples and cremation grounds, possess vulnerable people
with a low social standing or who are in a liminal condition such
as children, people on their own at night, people whose wealth has
been lost, those intoxicated with love, and those who wish to die.
The text goes on to list various women vulnerable to possession,
such as those who have bathed after menstruation, those who are
naked, ﬁlled with passion, intoxicated, pregnant or prostitutes. 87
The world is populated by these supernatural beings, particularly
Yogin¬s who take theriomorphic forms; one should never show anger
towards them.88 Possession is also related to caste: there are demons
who possess Brahmans (brahmar®k◊asa), warriors (k◊atriyar®k◊asa)
and commoners (vai˜ya).89 The Tantras®ra-sam. graha presents simi-
lar concerns, although here interfaces much more explicitly with
Ayurveda. Indeed, the text is particularly interesting in locating the
origins of ‘trance’ or ‘madness’ (unm®da) in both naturalistic and
supernatural causes, due to the anger of a deity of guru certainly,
but also due to unwholesome food, or emotional upset such as grief,
fear, and desire for joy, and born from an inbalance in the three
humours (trido◊aj®Ω) known to Ayurveda.90
   One interesting feature of this material is that the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-
paddhati does not maintain a distinction between the possessing being
(the bh‚ta or whatever) and the possessed person. For example, the
text describes the ‘angry possessor’ (he¥raga grah¬) as one who kneels
or whose face is on the ground, grimacing, with clenched ﬁsts, and
one afﬂicted by an ‘ash’ as being (bhasmagrah¬) is ill-mannered, trem-
bling and babbling with her/his eyes crossed.91 This is a description
of the possessed person but the text does not make any distinction
clear, so in afﬂicting the possessed with ‘remedies’ the exorcist or
mantrin is afﬂicting the possessing being. Having described these
beings, the text goes on to prescribe how to banish them with varying
degrees of harshness; if medicine and offerings (bali) have not freed
the possessed, then the medicine (citkits®) may be force.92 Thus, the
exorcist or master of mantras, the mantrin, should release the ghosts
by repeating mantras, but if this does not work he needs to resort
                         Tantric Civilisation                           

to ﬁrmer ritual methods. Thus the opening of chapter  describes
the following ritual procedures.
  –. Repeating [the mantra] ‘Heart, the sound of the Lord etc...’
  [while offering] pulse and jaggery, [the mantrin] visualising himself as
  Rudra, should hold down and beat [the possessed person], on account
  of which the demons free him in a moment. [Repeating the mantra] ‘at
  the end of the heart...]’ and so on and preparing this pulse, the demon
  frees one who eats it. A man who repeats [this mantra] namo bhagavate
  etc. should free the demons, ghosts and so on. . Having repeated [the
  mantra] ‘savour, the sound of the moon of the heart’ etc. seven times,
  [the mantrin] should fasten the top-knot of the possessed [to a tree]
  [then] the possessor will in time return once more in the citadel of
  ﬁre and wind. –. Writing on the possessed with ash and ﬁxing him
  with mantra repeated a hundred and eight times, [the mantrin] should
  thrown water on his face. Repeating mantras and binding him to a
  pillar with a rope muttered over with mantras, [the mantrin] should
  ﬁx [the demon]. . [Then] making a substitute body with rice ﬂower
  (pri◊ﬂapratikr. tim), he should invoke the demon into it, bringing it to
  life, [the mantrin] should destroy it with a knife. . [Then the mantrin]
  should cut the esoteric centres of the body (marman) with a trident
  and make blood ﬂow if he has not [yet] freed the possessed from the
  possessor. . He should then offer the cut image anointed with black
  mustard into the ﬁre pit, [then] abandoning the thousand [pieces in the
  ﬁre] the burned demon ﬂees.93

Here we have the mantrin identifying himself with Rudra, empoy-
ing mantras given in the text, writing mantras upon the possessed
person, and even inscribing him with a trident to make blood ﬂow
from the secret centres (marman) known to Ayurveda. With these
procedures the demons leave and return to their abode in ﬁre or
wind. Other procedures involve piercing the ersatz body (puttali
or pi◊ﬂapratikr. ti) with sharp sticks.94 Or the mantrin should ‘write
the demon’ (likhed graham – the name) on the ﬂoor with charcoal
and then, as before, pierce the body’s centres (marman) with sticks
of the neem tree. Either the ‘crushing demon’ dies or, having been
released, he leaves immediately.95 There is an ambiguity in this
verse about who dies, especially as the demon is identiﬁed with
the possessed person in the text. If these procedures fail, then the
mantrin should make offerings (bali) such as grain and blood-water
(raktatoya) to appease the demons.96 The offering of ‘blood-water’
                       The Tantric Body

strongly supports the view that this text is from Kerala, where,
even to this day, a thick substance of substitute blood, ‘blood-water’
(guruti) is offered to deities.97 This substance is to be used to purify
and protect the house; thus the mantrin should scatter offerings (bali)
in all directions for the paciﬁcation (˜®nti) of all the bh‚tas and to
ensure liberation for the possessed and possessors alike.98 We can read
‘liberation’ (mok◊a) as being brought back into the fold of textually
sanctioned, Brahmanical control. The supernatural beings succumb
to the power of scripture sanctioned by tradition, so the possessed
succumb to tradition through its inscription on their bodies.
    Possession thus happens to people generally of low social standing,
such as women and low castes, or those who are in liminal condi-
tions such as emotional distress. The text is an excellent example
of the ways in which the body is entextualised. We have a detailed
account of how the possessed body is constructed through ritual
procedures and an account of the colonisation of the body by tantric,
Brahmanical orthodoxy represented by the mantrin. The interiority
of the ﬁrst person is subsumed by a more powerful ﬁrst person, and
the ‘I’ comes to refer not to the everyday self but to a greater self
deﬁned within the parameters of the tradition. The body is colonised
by textually deﬁned supernatural beings, it is then recolonised by the
Brahmanical tradition, tamed, controlled, and brought back into con-
formity through being entextualised in ways legitimised by a tantric,
Brahmanical orthodoxy. Indeed the ritual procedures are familiar to
us from other contexts, especially divinisation in the deha˜uddhi or
bh‚ta˜uddhi. This inscription of the text on to the body is at times
literal, with the subtle centres of the possessed being inscribed with
ˆiva’s trident. The ritual procedures are tradition-speciﬁc – as we
see from overlap with the Kum®ra-tantra – showing how the body
becomes the vessel for supernatural beings, in a way not dissimilar
to the divinisation of the body in the tantric ritual process of the
bh‚ta˜uddhi, but this process is controllable and unwanted entry
by lower categories of supernatural agents can equally be affected
through ritual means. The entextualisation of the body is the con-
trol of the body and arguably the community’s self-policing of its
boundaries, as well as giving expression to those otherwise excluded
from mainstream channels of expression.
                         Tantric Civilisation                           

    So far we have seen how divinisation functions as a theme at
different levels of tantric civilisation outside of the individual prac-
titioner. The king becomes divinised through tantric abhi◊eka; the
representation of erotic bodies on temples walls are divinised; and the
body in possession becomes divinised in the sense that an external
power occupies it. Kingship, the temple and possession share this
common theme of transformation through empowerment, and this
empowerment is determined in text- and tradition-speciﬁc ways.
One last area that needs be mentioned here is devotion. Devotion
or bhakti as a particular form of interiority is not central to tantric
discourse and practice generally, but it is undoubtedly present as
is attested by devotional hymns to deities and the supplication of
practitioners to their gods for the purposes of power and/or libera-
tion. Moreover tantric themes have affected the wider devotional
culture of medieval India in profound ways. There is not time to
examine these now, but sufﬁce it to suggest that erotic bhakti, such
as that articulated in the Bh®gavata-pur®n. a and the Gaudiya Vai◊n. ava
tradition more widely, is pervaded by tantric ideas, not only seen
in the centrality of tantric Vai◊n. ava theology in the form of the
P®ñcar®tra, but seen in the erotic devotion (madhura/˜r. n. gara bhakti)
of the late medieval Caitanya sect and the Gosvamins. Here devotion
to Kr. ◊n. a is akin to the devotion of lovers, and as the deity enters the
practitioner through formal ritual structure in tantric daily ritual or
in possession, so the deity is invited to enter into the devotee. The
types of devotion articulated by r‚pa Gosvamin in his Bhaktirasamr. ta
sindhu99 are ways in which the body becomes entextualised. Indeed,
this kind of devotionalism becomes explicitly fused with a left-hand
ritual practice in the Vai◊n. ava Sahajiya sect.100 The reverse is also
true, that bhakti becomes inﬂuential and important in tantric tradi-
tions, especially the P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva Siddh®nta in the South,
but also in monistic ˆaivism.
    We see from these examples that the body as structuring topos
is closely connected to tantric revelation and the body’s divinisa-
tion is closely linked to the text and the ritual construction of the
body based on textual models. The body is central as a foundational
metaphor in the history of tantric civilisation. More could be said
about interface between Tantrism, especially possession, and bhakti,
                      The Tantric Body

but the examples given here are sufﬁcient to show that divinisation
is a theme common to this culture that has lasted for a millennium.
We must now leave these more general considerations and return
to the particularity of text and tradition in order to show how text
and body interrelate, and to show in the context of practice the
speciﬁcity of the claim of the body as text.
     

The Body as Text
                               

                      The P®ñcar®tra




A      there are considerable difﬁculties, we can perhaps
      claim that our textual sources demonstrate three general levels
at which the tantric traditions operated. First, there is the level of
the individual practitioner, performing rites outside of the public
gaze, who has undergone a possibly secret initiation in order to gain,
primarily, supernatural power and ﬁnal liberation. Second, there
is what we might call temple tantra, which in the past supported
royal claims to identiﬁcation with tantric deities and is concerned
with the installation of icons in temples, the performance of formal,
temple worship, and rites of passage including funeral rites. This
temple tantra still exists in South India in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta
tradition, in South Indian ˆr¬ Vai◊n. avism, and in Kerala where it is
normative, temple Hinduism. Lastly we have popular religion, which
is primarily concerned with the appeasing of ferocious deities, pos-
session and exorcism. All of these layers of tantric practice involve
the entextualisation of the body, and common ritual processes can
be identiﬁed.
   Although the vedic body forms the backdrop of tantric develop-
ments, the tantric traditions extend, modify and reject much of the
vedic discourse about the body. While there are ideas in the tantric
tradition that reﬂect the vedic, such as the theme that the body
recapitulates the structure of the cosmos, some ideas and practices
                      The Tantric Body

are prototypically tantric, such as the divinisation of the body and
tantric mantras. The tantric traditions are aware of Brahmanical
purity laws as articulated in the dharma˜®stra and either accept
and appropriate these laws at some level of practice or consciously
transgress them in particular rites as being irrelevant to power and
salvation.
    In this chapter I will begin to show in some textual detail, with
reference to the P®ñcar®tra, the tantric Vai◊n. ava tradition, how the
body becomes inscribed by the text through which the practitioner
internalises the tradition. The emanationist, hierarchical cosmology
is reﬂected and enacted in the body in text-speciﬁc ways. Through
an examination of this detailed example, we will be able to appreci-
ate tantric ritual and soteriology in general, for to attain liberation
is, broadly speaking, to trace a route back through the cosmos to
its source, which is to trace a route through the body. This tracing
a route through the body is the inscribing of tradition on to the
body. While there are undoubtedly continuities from Brahmanical
orthodoxy and orthopraxy, the speciﬁcity of the tantric traditions
and their mutual differentiation lies in the way the body becomes
the text. Understanding the entextualisation of the body allows us
to see the commonality of process at work within tantrism and also
the differentiation and particularity of tradition.
    We begin our account with a description of an emanationist
cosmology that is recapitulated in the body through ritual (both
external and internal). The cosmos is mapped on to the body, not in
an invariant way, but in different ways for different purposes in dif-
ferent texts. The entextualisation of the body is tradition- and text-
speciﬁc, although the process is shared across traditions. This kind
of mapping of the cosmos is of central importance for the tantric
practitioner as it has soteriological consequences. Through symboli-
cally mapping the cosmos in this way, the practitioner can retrace
the emergence of the cosmos back to its source, the transcendent
source of all phenomena. Historically much of this cosmology is
derived from S®m. khya philosophy. Like S®m. khya the earliest texts
and traditions are predominantly dualistic, or present a qualiﬁed
dualism. There are no early texts that present an uncompromising
monistic doctrine, as Sanderson has argued. Among the earliest
                          The P®ñcar®tra                            

texts are those of the P®ñcar®tra, which intend to maintain some
distinction between the transcendent Lord and his creation and
creatures, even though by ‘creation’ we mean that the Lord acts upon
already pre-existent matter and upon beginningless souls. Although
these texts are tantric and centrally concerned with ritual, they are
also pervaded with devotionalism (bhakti). Indeed, bhakti could be
said to be an important dimension in the P®ñcar®tra textual corpus,
as Oberhammer has shown with regard to a devotional creation
narrative forming the ‘frame story’ (Rahmenerzählung) to the ritual
description of the Paramasam. hit®. Indeed, as Oberhammer describes,
one can connect this text with the Vi˜i◊ﬂ®dvaita tradition, with its
central emphasis on grace, whereby the individual entrusts himself
to the highest God knowing that he cannot contribute to his own
salvation.1 But while there may be a strong theistic metaphysics in
these texts, they are concerned with the ritual construction of the
body as divine in order to approach this deity and share the common
ritual concerns of other Tantras. Let us take our ﬁrst example from
P®ñcar®tra cosmology and ritual.

                    Emanationist Cosmology

Accounts of cosmology in the texts are emanationist, which means
that lower levels of the cosmos are thought to emerge or emanate
from the higher due to the action of the will of a transcendent being.
These cosmologies are generally structured with different levels
embedded within each other, such that, to use Isayeva’s insightful
remark in respect of the M®n. ¥ukya Upani◊ad, ‘each higher level
completely absorbs and incorporates all the ones below it’.2 Let us
illustrate this with a concrete example.
    One of the most important texts of the tantric Vai◊n. ava revelation
is the Jay®khya-sam. hit®, one of the P®ñcar®tra’s ‘three gems’, whose
ﬁrst chapters present an emanationist cosmology.3 The Jay®khya
contains one of the earliest and most elaborate representations of
cosmology and its interface with the daily ritual sequence of the
practitioner. The text must be dated prior to the Kashmir ˆaiva
author Utpal®c®rya (– ), who quotes it.4 First, we have
pure creation (˜uddha-sarga), in which the transcendent Lord, the
                       The Tantric Body

Supreme V®sudeva, manifests in different forms that have different
cosmological functions. Below this we have intermediate creation,
in which limiting constraints begin to operate on individual souls,
followed by impure creation where souls are bound by the cosmic
principles.5 In chapter four of the Jay®khya, the sage N®rada asks
the Lord (Bhagavat) to tell him about the pure creation and the
Lord answers that the supreme absolute (brahman) is identical to
the personal being of V®sudeva, from whom emanate lower forms.
Let the text speak for itself:
  [The ultimate reality] is non-distinct from V®sudeva and other
  manifestations. Having a hundred-fold radiance of ﬁre, sun and moon,
  V®sudeva is the Lord, the truth of that [absolute], the supreme Lord.
  Agitating his own radiance through his own energy (tejas), the Lord
  whose form is light manifests the god Acyuta, like lightening, O
  Brahman. [Then] that Acyuta of ﬁrm radiance spreads his own form,
  dependent on V®sudeva as a wisp of cloud (depends) on the summer
  heat. Then shaking himself he [in turn] produced the god Satya,
  whose body is shining, as the ocean [produces] a bubble. He is called
  the light made of consciousness who produces himself by means of
  himself [as the god] called Puru◊a who is great, an unending stream
  of light. That supreme Lord is [in turn] the support of all the [lower]
  gods, their inner controller, as the sky [is the support] of the stars. As
  a ﬁre with its fuel sends forth a mass of sparks, O twice-born one, so
  the Supreme Lord, who is yet desireless, [sends forth manifestation].6

Here V®sudeva (i.e. Kr. ◊n. a, the son of V®sudeva) emanates the
forms of Acyuta, Satya and Puru◊a,7 deities we are familiar with
from the related Vaikh®nasa tradition. The P®ñcar®tra knows these
as vy‚has8 emanations, who in other P®ñcar®tra literature possess
the names of V®sudeva’s brother Sam. kar◊an. a, his son Pradyumna
and his grandson Aniruddha.9 While in their essence these gods are
non-distinct from V®sudeva, each is an aspect of the supreme being
with a cosmological function in the manifestation of lower worlds.10
V®sudeva has six pure qualities (gun. a), namely knowledge (jñ®na),
majesty (ai˜varya), power (˜akti), strength (bala), energy (v¬rya) and
splendour (tejas), from which the vy‚has are made.
   In other P®ñcar®tra texts, after the pure creation comes a middle
layer or ‘mixed creation’ containing the categories of lower material
energy, the M®y® ˆakti, along with the cosmic self of Puru◊a. In the
                          The P®ñcar®tra                           

Jay®khya, this Puru◊a is not the vy‚ha but a lower manifestation
conceptualised as the basis for all empirical beings in the lower
order of creation. It is a ‘beehive’ (ko˜a madhukr. ta) from which
all individual souls (j¬va) emanate, contaminated by the dust of
beginningless karmic traces (like the scent of pollen11), and to which
they return during the periodic destruction or reabsorption of the
lower creation.12 The universe in which they are born and which
they inhabit is made up from M®y® ˆakti, who generates the lower
orders. In the Lak◊m¬-tantra she is identiﬁed with the Goddess Mah®
Lak◊m¬ as the power (˜akti) of Puru◊a, herself divided into the three
goddesses, Mah® ˆr¬, Mah® K®l¬ and Mah® Vidy®, as manifestations
of the three cosmic qualities or gun. as. Mah® ˆr¬ is identiﬁed with a
body made of qualities (gaun. amaya vapus) and the other two with a
body of time (k®lamaya vapus). This complex scheme is the result
of the incorporation of an earlier system of twenty-four categories
(tattva) in the S®m. khya tradition into the P®ñcar®tra and an iden-
tiﬁcation of abstract, cosmic principles with deities.
   From M®y® emanates Prakr. ti, the foundation of material creation,
from whom emanates the ‘great one’ (mahat) (see below). From this
is generated the ‘I-maker’ (aham. k®ra) and thence the mind (manas)
for dealing with worldly transaction, the ﬁve senses, ﬁve capacities
for acting, the subtle elements (sound, touch, form, taste and smell)
and the ﬁve material elements (space, air, ﬁre, water and earth).13
The individual soul is covered, as it were, by these emanations of
ˆakti and thereby entrapped. Thus liberation comes to be envisaged
as the separation of the soul from this material entrapment through
the grace of God.
   What is signiﬁcant about the S®m. khya categories is that they both
represent stages in the development or unfolding of the cosmos and
are also categories for the analysis of the person. There is both a
cosmic and an individual function to the tattvas; a cosmic dimension
which would seem to have been present from the very beginning
of thinking in this way.14 It is clear that there are difﬁculties in
making the tattvas as an analysis of the person correspond to an
analysis of cosmical unfolding. The ﬁrst emergent principle from
foundational matter (prakr. ti) is the great one (mahat), which is usu-
ally identiﬁed with buddhi,15 often translated as ‘intelligence’ but
                      The Tantric Body

perhaps better rendered as ‘higher mind’ as its function is not only
one of discrimination but it also has a cosmological function beyond
the individual.16 This might be reﬂected in its alternative name,
‘the great one’ (mahat). In the S®m. khya system of philosophy and
in the Tantras, the buddhi contains within it the constraints that
become operative at the lower levels. These constraints are called the
bh®vas, which we might render as ‘dispositions’, and the pratyayas,
we might render as ‘motivations’ or ‘foundational conceptions’, the
dispositions being the cause of the foundational concepts.17 The
dispositions are listed as ‘moral duty’ (dharma), knowledge (jñ®na),
dispassion (vair®gya) and majesty (ai˜varya), along with their op-
posites, adharma, ajñ®na and so on. The foundational conceptions
are perfection (siddhi), contentment (tu◊ﬂi), powerlessness (a˜akti)
and error (viparyaya). All are contained within the buddhi and are
themselves governed by the famous qualities (gun. as) of lightness
(sattva), passion (rajas) and dark inertia (tamas), which come into
operation from within the material foundation (prakr. ti).18 Thus there
is a complex causal sequence that constrains or limits a being to
what it is. The qualities within the material foundation of the lower
universe generate the dispositions within the buddhi, which in turn
give rise to the foundational conceptions that govern a person.
    From the buddhi the ‘I-maker’ (aham. k®ra) is produced. This,
under the sway of the gun. as, generates three forms which govern the
lower evolutes, namely rajasic aham. k®ra, which generates the worldly
mind (manas) and the ﬁve senses; sattvic aham. k®ra, which generates
the ﬁve action capacities (talking, handling, walking, reproducing
and eliminating waste); and tamasic aham. k®ra, which generates the
subtle elements (sound, touch, form, taste, and smell). These in
turn generate the ﬁve material elements (space, air, ﬁre, water and
earth).19
    In absorbing this ancient cosmological structure and complicating
it through adding their own levels, the tantric traditions inherit a
model of causation called ‘transformation’ (parin®mav®da), whereby
an effect is a real transformation of its cause,20 along with S®m. khya.
In S®m. khya there is an eternal distinction between the individual
self (puru◊a) and the material foundation (prakr. ti), which the tantric
traditions adopt but reinterpret within their own metaphysics. Thus
                          The P®ñcar®tra                            

in the P®ñcar®tra we see that the puru◊a is reinterpreted to mean
not the individual self, as in S®m. khya, but a cosmic self that is the
basis or foundation of all particular selves, which absorbs those selves
back at a dissolution of the cosmos and throws them out again at a
creation. Unlike the atheistic S®m. khya, the P®ñcar®tra claims that
all this cosmic process is generated by a transcendent God, the Lord
of the universe; while matter is generated out of his female energy,
the souls retain some distinction from him even once they are liber-
ated. While there is a sense in which the liberated soul becomes one
with the Lord, the texts display a great deal of ambivalence about
this and wish to maintain their ontological distinction. As Marion
Rastelli observes with regard to the Jay®khya-sam. hit®, this is above
all a philosophy of ‘difference in identity’ (bhed®bheda) in which
the self is not identical but a fragment (am. ˜a) of the Lord.21 Thus
we read in the Jay®khya (quoted above) that manifestation is akin
to sparks from a ﬁre; the sparks partake of the same substance yet
are also distinct. So the Jay®khya can say that although the Lord
abides in distinctions, he is really one (eka).22
    Clearly the P®ñcar®tra is theistic in positing a transcendent Lord
as the creator and source of the universe, and the individual, animat-
ing principle as a particle of that transcendent being, yet retaining
some distinction. Although the Lord is one, this is no monism in
which the totality of the transcendent is coextensive with the totality
of the universe. In his essence (svar‚pa) the Lord has no point of
comparison (anaupamya), omniscient, omnipresent, beyond being
(sat) and non-being (asat), he possesses all qualities yet is bereft of
them; standing far away he is yet in the heart, and so on.23 This
apophatic language would not be out of place in Christianity and
it conveys the utter transcendence of the theistic reality it pro-
poses. In relation to this the self, constrained by the restrictions
that govern the lower order universe, seems insigniﬁcant. Yet while
the self ’s being is wholly dependent upon the transcendent theistic
reality, Para V®sudeva, it remains distinct in the face of his utter
transcendence.
    Having given an account of manifestation, the text then goes
on to show how this is mapped on to the body in daily ritual pro-
cedures and that the cosmological scheme is not simply presented
                           The Tantric Body

                          Pāñcarātra cosmology

Transcendent V®sudeva                                               Pure Creation
The vy‚has
              V®sudeva
                          Sam. kar◊an. a/Acyuta
                                   Pradyumna/Satya
                                                Aniruddha/Puru◊a

Further emanations as sub-vy‚has, incarnations (avat®ra) and temple images (arca)

Puru◊a                                 M®y®                        Mixed Creation
(source of bound souls)      (source of lower creation)


The lower tattvas                                              Impure Creation



as information, but is used in ritual procedures and is thought to
have soteriological effects. That is, the structure of the universe is
part of the process of the soul’s liberation, as the path to liberation
is a path through this cosmological scheme. The ‘map’ presented
in P®ñcar®tra cosmology functions to show the practitioner a way
through to transcendence.


                    The Puriﬁcation of the Body24

The very structure of the Jay®khya reﬂects the entextualisation
of the body. First the text presents an account of the hierarchical
cosmos along the lines of the description we have just seen, and
second it presents the ritual pattern that the initiated practitioner
must follow in his daily practice, broadly comprising, after puriﬁca-
tory ablutions (sn®na), the puriﬁcation of the elements within the
body (bh‚ta˜uddhi or deha˜uddhi), the divinisation of body through
imposing mantras upon it (ny®sa), internal worship of the deity
(antara/ m®nasa-y®ga) performed purely in the imagination, followed
by external worship (bahya-y®ga) with offerings of ﬂowers, incense
and so on to the deity.25 This general ritual structure is found in all
tantric traditions. To illustrate the ways in which the body becomes
                          The P®ñcar®tra                            

text I will focus on the stages of this ritual process, the puriﬁcation
of the body, the divinisation of the body, mental or inner worship,
followed by external worship. In order to explicate the point fully,
it is necessary to consider the issue in greater detail.
    The origins of the bh‚ta˜uddhi practice are unclear. The Jay®khya
presents the fullest account of it in the tantric literature, although
the puriﬁcation of the elements is also found in Buddhist Vajray®na
ritual, although some Vajray®na texts (the Anuttarayoga Tantras)
are themselves derived from ˆaiva prototypes.26 The roots of the
bh‚ta˜uddhi may, however, be much older. There are arguably two
sources: offerings made into the sacriﬁcial ﬁre in vedic ritual, and
early cosmological speculation of S®m. khya and proto-S®m. khya
metaphysics. For example, the Br. had®ran. yaka Upani◊ad describes
making offerings of ghee into the sacred ﬁre to the earth, atmosphere
and sky,27 although making offerings to the sequence of elements
does not occur. The general idea of the identiﬁcation of the body
with the cosmos is of course ancient, with textual antecedents in
the Veda,28 where, particularly in the Br®hman. as, correspondence
(bandhu) between the sacriﬁce and the cosmos becomes central to
ritual performance and speculation.29 Second, its origins may argu-
ably be found in early Buddhist meditation exercises (kr. tsna/kasin. a)
and the cultivation of the meditative sign (nimitta) that leads into
meditative absorption (dhy®na/jh®na). Indeed, it is possibly here that
we ﬁnd the origins of the visualisation methods that were to become
so important in the tantric traditions, both Hindu and Buddhist.
These exercises are ten among forty objects of meditation described
in Buddhaghosa’s Visuddhimagga,30 although they also occur in the
P®li canon itself.31 The kasin. as comprise the ﬁve elements and ﬁve
colours,32 focusing upon which leads into the higher levels of medita-
tion. For example, the earth kasin. a is a clay disc, an object that is
concentrated upon until the image is internalised within conscious-
ness without external support. In this way the kasin. a is akin to
the internally arising sign (nimitta), like an afterimage, which leads
into jh®na.33 Traces of these practices can perhaps be found in the
bh‚ta˜uddhi.
    In a Hindu context, the bh‚ta˜uddhi’s earliest occurrences are in
the Jay®khya and in the ˆaiva K®mik®gama.34 There is a passage in
                      The Tantric Body

the Netra-tantra, a ˆaiva text from Kashmir, which mentions the
ﬁve elements in connection with the pots required for consecration
(abhi◊eka) of the teacher (®c®rya) and practitioner (s®dhaka), although
no ritual details are given, the text functioning more as a mnemonic
of assumed knowledge on behalf of the reader.35 In ˆaiva Siddh®nta
a standard source for the bh‚ta˜uddhi is the Soma˜ambhu-paddhati
(eleventh century ), itself based on the K®mik®gama and the
Acintyavi˜vas®dh®khya, which, Brunner-Lachaux observes, follows
Soma˜ambhu in places line by line.36 The ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati
follows Soma˜ambhu, as does the Aghora˜iv®c®rya-paddhati (twelfth
century ). The term bh‚ta˜uddhi also occurs in other treatises of
the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, including a text simply named the Bh‚ta˜uddhi.37
Later the bh‚ta˜uddhi is found in medical or Ayurvedic practices
within the regime of cleansing the body’s impurities.38 To demon-
strate a common structure in the bh‚ta˜uddhi rite, and so to demon-
strate a common structure of the body being inscribed by tradition,
I shall follow the ritual procedure described in the Jay®khya and in
the next chapter show parallels with the ˆaiva material.


        The Bhūtaśuddhi in the Tantric Revelation

In spite of the professed divergence of the ˆaiva and P®ñcar®tra
systems and the desire of their protagonists to distance their tradi-
tions from each other, there is a high degree of overlap, not only
in terms of theology, but especially at the level of ritual repre-
sentation. This similarity of ritual process in our texts points to a
ritual substrate common to the theologically distinct P®ñcar®tra and
ˆaiva traditions. Although ritual contents in terms of mantras and
deities vary, the sequence of daily and occasional rites cuts across
sectarian distinctions and points to an almost independent life of
ritual representation in these texts, and to the common structure of
entextualising the body, although in tradition-speciﬁc ways.
   Part of this textually represented ritual substrate are various
hierarchical cosmologies which share the common pattern of lower
forms emanating from higher, as described in the passage quoted
above. A common scheme found in tantric texts is the ‘six ways’
                          The P®ñcar®tra                            

(◊a¥adhvan), which are parallel ritual courses through the cosmos
inscribed on the body.39 These ways incorporate the cosmological
categories (tattva) and their division into ﬁve realms (kal®). In the
ˆaiva system we have thirty-six tattvas, which adds eleven ˆaiva
ones to the twenty-ﬁve S®m. khya ones, while the P®ñcar®tra assumes
only the S®m. khya categories, although it has cosmological functions
analogous to the higher ˆaiva ones, as we have seen. There is a
common overall structure here of a pure, mixed and impure creation,
although for the monistic Trika ˆaivism the broad distinction is
between the pure and the impure creations. While these cosmologies
are theologically important – as can be seen in Bhojadeva’s linking of
higher beings to different levels of the cosmos in the Tattvaprak®˜a40
– their primary importance is as ritual rather than theological enti-
ties; cosmology has a primarily ritual function in these traditions.41
This can be illustrated particularly well in the bh‚ta˜uddhi sequence
where the cosmos is mapped on to the body and dissolved, as the
lower levels of the cosmos are dissolved into the higher during the
cosmic dissolution (pralaya). The terminology here is that of the
tattvas of S®m. khya in which the gross elements (bh‚ta) that comprise
the physical world are dissolved into the subtle elements (tanm®tra)
that are their source. The puriﬁcation of the body through dissolv-
ing its constituent elements into their cause would seem to be a
characteristically tantric practice.42
   Within all tantric ritual, visualisation of ritual action and deities
is of central importance in daily and occasional rites, and in both
the P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva Siddh®nta to perform a visualisation is to
perform a mental action that has soteriological effects. Once initi-
ated, the ˆaiva or Vai◊n. ava adept in these cults was expected to
perform obligatory daily worship. For the P®ñcar®trin his practice
meant following the P®ñcar®tra sam. sk®ras, whereby his body was
inscribed with tradition by being branded at initiation (tapa) with a
hot iron discus (cakra), being given a ritual name, reciting mantra,
and engagaing in ritual practice (y®ga).43 The P®ñcar®trin’s daily
observances involved ﬁve obligatory acts adopted from vedic ortho-
praxy, characterised by Gupta as the recitation of laudatory verses or
stotras (brahmayajña), daily liturgy (devayajña), making offerings to
malevolent supernatural beings (bh‚tayajña), making offerings to the
                        The Tantric Body

ancestors (pitr. yajña) and the feeding of (Vai◊n. ava) guests (nr. yajña).44
The Saiddh®ntika similarly follows the orthoprax injunctions of
the dharma˜®stra, performing rites at the junctures (sam. dhy®) of
the day, particularly the p‚j® at dawn (as do the P®ñcar®trins).45
The purpose of this daily rite, apart from its being a sign of the
devotee’s adherence to the cult of his initiation, was to enable him
eventually to destroy the limiting factors (mala) which constrain
his soul (j¬va) within the cycle of reincarnation (sam. s®ra) and so to
be ready for liberation (mok◊a) by receiving the grace of the Lord
(ˆiva or Vi◊n. u) at his death. In this sense the P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva
Siddh®nta are very different from the monistic traditions of non-
Saiddh®ntika ˆaivism, as Sanderson has demonstrated.46
   The Jay®khya describes four classes of adept, the samayajña,
putraka, s®dhaka and ®c®rya,47each having undergone a particular
ablution (abhi◊eka) as part of his initiation (d¬k◊®).48 As other texts,
the Jay®khya has the male practitioner in mind, although it does
allow women initiation, aligning them with ˜‚dras.49 Chapter  of
the Jay®khya is devoted to the bh‚ta˜uddhi and the spiritual ascent
of the soul (j¬va) ready for the creation of the divinised body.50
Through symbolically destroying the physical or gross body, the
adept can create a pure, divinised body (divyadeha) with which to
offer worship to the deities of his system. He does this ﬁrst only in
imagination and second in the physical world, for – as in all tantric
systems – only a god can worship a god. The textual representation
of the bh‚ta˜uddhi is set within a sequence in which the physical or
elemental body (bhautika-˜ar¬ra) is puriﬁed and the soul ascends from
the heart through the body, and analogously through the cosmos,
to the Lord N®r®yan. a located at the crown of the head. The text
presents us with a detailed account of this process, which can be
summarised as follows.
   Going to a pure, unfrequented, but charming place, the adept
offers obeisance to the Lord and pays homage to the lineage of
teachers (gurusantati), and having received the mental command
(m®nas¬-®jñ®) from the Lord and lineage of teachers, he is ready to
perform mental action (m®nas¬m. nirvahet... kriy®m).51 The practitioner
puriﬁes his hands with the weapon (astra) mantra and puriﬁes the
place by visualising Vi◊n. u, like a thousand suns, vomiting ﬂames from
                            The P®ñcar®tra                             

his mouth. The earth then appears as if baked by the ﬁre of mantra.52
In this process we see the construction of a ‘ritual body’ in opposition
to the ‘genetic’ or ‘biological’ body, which, in its non-ritual state, is
impure (malina), subject to decay, not autonomous (asvatantra), and
made from blood and semen (retoraktodbhava).53 The non-puriﬁed
body is the opposite of the Lord’s body possessed of the six quali-
ties.54 This puriﬁcation of the body entails the construction of the
ritual body; a process which had begun with bathing and which
continues with the selection of the place and the placing of a blade
of sacred grass, ﬂower or leaf in the tuft of hair, with mantra.55 The
symbolic destruction of the body takes place through dissolving
the elements of the cosmos within it. As in the ﬁnal dissolution of
the cosmos, when each element or category retracts into its source,
so in daily ritual this process is recapitulated within the adept’s
body. The actual process occurs through linking together sequences
of syllables to form mantras associated with the elements, such as
the OM. ˆL§M. PR. THIVYAI HUM      . PHAﬁ corresponding to the earth
element, which are modiﬁed for each element, replacing the seed
syllable (b¬ja) ˆL§M. with — V§M . , HY§M. and K—M§M    . as necessary.
                                                                        56

Each of the elements is visualised in a certain way, associated with
particular symbols, and as pervading a particular part of the body
in a hierarchical sequence. Each element is in turn symbolically
destroyed in the imagination through being absorbed into its mantra
and into the energies (˜akti) of the powers (vibhava) or subtle ele-
ments (tanm®tra) which gave rise to it. For example, the Jay®khya
describes the puriﬁcation of the earth element as follows:
   [The practitioner] should visualise a quadrangular, yellow earth,
   marked with the sign of thunder, connected with the ﬁve, sound etc.
   [i.e. the ﬁve subtle elements ˜abda, spar˜a, r‚pa, rasa and gandha] and
   ﬁlled with trees and mountains, adorned with oceans, islands, good
   rivers and walled towns. He should visualize [that earth] entering his
   own body from the outside with an inhaled breath, and uttering the
   mantra he should imagine it as tranquilized, pervading in due order
   from the knees to the soles of the feet by means of the retained breath,
   O best of twice born ones. Then, [the earth is] gradually dissolved in
   its own mantra-form, and this mantra-king [dissolved] in the energy of
   smell. After that he should emit the energy of smell with the exhaled
   breath.57
                       The Tantric Body

    This process of inhaling the visualised element that pervades a
particular area of the body, dissolving it into its mantra, then into
its subtle cause, and exhaling it, is followed with the other elements.
The energy of smell having been exhaled into the substratum of
water, the water element is then imagined as having the form of
a half-moon, marked by a lotus, and containing all aquatic media
– the oceans, rivers, the six ﬂavours (rasa) – and aquatic beings.
Inhaling the image, it pervades the adept’s body from the thighs
to the knees and is dissolved into its mantra, then into the energy
of taste (rasa˜aki), which he emits with the exhaled breath.58 The
same process occurs with the remaining elements. The triangle of
ﬁre containing all ﬁery and bright things, including beings at higher
levels of the cosmos with self-luminous bodies (svaprak®˜a-˜ar¬ra),
is inhaled, pervades the body from the navel to where the water
element had begun, is dissolved into its mantra, into the energy of
form (r‚pa˜akti), and exhaled as before.59 Similarly the air element is
inhaled, pervades from throat to navel and is exhaled as the energy
of touch (spar˜a˜akti).60 This merges into space (®k®˜a), which, in
the same way, is inhaled, pervades to the aperture of the absolute
(brahmarandhra), dissolves into its mantra, then into the energy of
sound (˜abda˜akti), and is emitted through the aperture at the crown
of the head (brahmarandhra).61 All this is accomplished by the power
of the mantras of the elements. Having left the body through the
brahmarandhra, individualised consciousness (caitanya j¬vabh‚ta)
has transcended the ‘cage of the elements’ (bh‚tapañjara) by rising
through the stages of space, the stars, lightening, the sun and moon,
stages which are themselves found in the Upani◊ads.62 In this way
the soul ascends in imagination up the central channel of the body
(su◊umn. ®) from the heart, through the levels of the cosmos (pada), to
the Lord at the crown of the head. He is envisaged in his supreme
body (paravigraha) as a mass of radiance (tejopuñja) standing within
a circle of light;63 a standard identiﬁcation of N®r®yan. a with the sun.
The joy that arises is the supreme energy of Vi◊n. u (par® vai◊n. av¬
˜akti)64 and results in a state of higher consciousness (sam®dhi) that
                                              .
is the ineffable freedom from ideation (san kalpanirmukta av®cya).65
    He enjoys this state of bliss, but the process of puriﬁcation is not
yet complete. Having transcended the subtle elements along with the
                          The P®ñcar®tra                            

gross body, the s®dhaka should burn it with the ﬁre arising from
his feet, generated by the power of his mantra. All that remains
is a pile of ashes that are then washed away to the quarters in his
imagination by a ﬂood of milky water arising from his meditation.66
With the universe of his imagination now ﬁlled with the ocean of
milk, a lotus emerges out of it containing N®r®yan. a, whose essence
is his mantra, the truth of the six cosmic paths.67 The s®dhaka’s
body, identiﬁed with N®r®yan. a, is puriﬁed, freed from old age and
death and has the appearance of pure crystal and the effulgence of a
thousand suns and moons.68 Having puriﬁed his body in this way, his
soul enters the inner lotus of this subtle body (purya◊ﬂaka) through
the aperture of the absolute from which it had earlier vacated its
residence. With a calm awareness (prasannadh¬) the adept is ready
to perform worship of the deity (yajed devam);69 that is, ready to
perform the divinisation of the body through imposing mantras upon
it, followed by mental sacriﬁce (m®nasay®ga) and external sacriﬁce
(b®hyay®ga), described in the following chapters.


                 The Divinisation of the Body
The divinisation of the body is a crucial juncture in tantric worship,
for through this procedure the practitioner identiﬁes himself with the
deities of the tradition. With the divinisation of the body through
imposing or ﬁxing mantras upon it, we see the formation of a body
in ways speciﬁc to text and tradition. It is perhaps in the divinisation
process that we see the particularity of the entextualisation and the
variable indexicality that constitutes subjectivity in these traditions.
The mantras and deities imposed on the body are speciﬁc to the
particular text, and the body is thus formed in a text-speciﬁc way.
The process of imposing mantras on the body is called ny®sa, from
the verbal root ny plus as, to put or cast down,70 within whose
semantic range is to place something in a picture, to paint and
depict. The practitioner touches the requisite part of the body and
recites the correct mantra. The Jay®khya is in no doubt about the
importance of this procedure as it makes the practitioner ‘equal to
the god of gods’ (devadevasama), fearless, and having power over
unexpected death.71
                       The Tantric Body

    The simple plank laid on the ground upon which the practitioner
is seated becomes the ‘throne’ (®sana) for the divinity he will become.
Beginning with the hands, speciﬁc mantras from the pantheon of
the Jay®khya are imposed on all the ﬁngers. Thus the root mantra
(m‚lamantra) along with the form mantra (m‚rtimantra) (namely om.
k◊¬m. k◊iΩ namaΩ, N®r®yan. ®ya vi˜v®tmane hr¬m. sv®h®) should ﬁrst
be ﬁxed on the right thumb followed by the other gods beginning
with the foreﬁnger. The ˜akti mantras, comprising the four Vai◊n. ava
goddesses Lak◊m¬, K¬rti, Jay® and M®y® in their sound form as
their mantras, are placed on the ﬁngers. Thus the Lak◊m¬ mantra
is placed on the ring ﬁnger, the K¬rti on the middle ﬁnger, Jay® on
                                                              .
the ring ﬁnger, and M®y® on the little ﬁnger. Next the an ga mantras
are imposed on the hands in reverse order from this procedure, the
‘heart’ (hr. t) mantra on the little ﬁnger, followed by the ‘head’ (˜iras),
‘tuft’ (˜ikh®), ‘armour’ (kavaca), to the ‘weapon’ (astra) on the thumb
and the ‘eye’ (netra, locana) on all the ﬁngertips. This is followed by
imposing further sets on mantras on the hands, the vaktra mantras
comprising the deities Nr. simh®, the man-lion incarnation of Vi◊n. u;
Kapila, the founding sage of the S®m. khya tradition identiﬁed with
Vi◊n. u; and Var®ha, the boar incarnation. The ‘marking’ or l®ñchana
mantras comprise the objects held by Vi◊n. u such as the conch, discus,
and club, themselves regarded as deities, and the secondary, up®n. ga
mantras comprise the all important vy‚has, the emanations V®sudeva,
    .
Sankar. ◊ana, Pradyumna, and Aniruddha along with Satya. All of
these are ﬁnally sealed with the pervading, seven-syllable mantra
that is imposed over them all.72
    With the hands divinised, the practitioner goes on to place mantras
of the same deities throughout the body, on the head, eyes, ears,
mouth, shoulders, hands (again), buttocks, heart, back, navel, hips,
knees and feet.73 For example, Lak◊m¬ and K¬rti are ﬁxed on the right
and left shoulders with Jay® on the right hand and M®y® on the left.74
This stage of the process is completed with the great seven-syllable
mantra of N®r®yan. a being applied to the body from head to foot,
covering and protecting it like armour. Indeed, N®r®yan. a is the inner
support of all the mantras, all the deities.75 Finally the practitioner
is fully divinised and identiﬁed with Vi◊n. u–N®r®yan. a. He visualises
himself as Vi◊n. u possessing the six divine qualities (gun. a) of the
                           The P®ñcar®tra                            

P®ñcar®tra divinity, namely knowledge (jñ®na), majesty (ai˜varya),
power (˜akti), strength (bala), energy (v¬rya) and splendour (tejas).76
His ritual action has ensured the identiﬁcation of himself, his every-
day indexical-I, with the absolute divine subjectivity of his god. His
ego (aham. k®ra) is ritually transformed into the absolute subjectivity
of Vi◊n. u, and thus he can say at the end of the divinisation process
‘I am the Lord Vi◊n. u, I am N®r®yan. a, Hari, and I am V®sudeva,
all-pervading, the abode of beings, without taint.’77 Divinised in
this way, the practitioner can proceed to inner worship and ﬁnally
external worship of his god.
   With this ritual sequence we are presented with an excellent
example of the way the body becomes the text in tantric tradi-
tions. The practitioner imposes deities as mantras upon his body
and these mantras and deities are text- and tradition-speciﬁc. While
the material of the Jay®khya is recapitulated to a large extent in the
Lak◊m¬-tantra, the text is unique in its full explication of the ritual
process of the identiﬁcation of the practitioner with the universe
and divinity. While the process, as I argue, is common to tantric
traditions, the content is always text- and tradition-speciﬁc. Thus
the initiate into the P®ñcar®tra, speciﬁcally the Jay®khya-sam. hit®, be-
comes divinised by P®ñcar®tra deities through P®ñcar®tra mantras.
   This divinisation of the body in a ritual sequence furthermore
functions to expand the practitioner’s subjectivity. Once again we
see how indexicality is variable and the subject of ﬁrst person predi-
cates, the indexical-I of everyday transaction, becomes expanded
to the cosmic subjectivity of Vi◊n. u. It is this indexical variability
that is important in the ritual sequence that is directly linked to
the entextualisation of the body. With the P®ñcar®tra there is a
potential theological problem in that Vi◊n. u–N®r®yan. a is thought to
be ontologically distinct from the devotee, and this would gener-
ally seem to be the case, but at the level of ritual this theological
desire for separation is eroded. We are dealing here with a tradition
that might be characterised as having both monistic and theistic or
dualistic dimensions, or, as its later theological articulation has it,
a theology of ‘qualiﬁed non-dualism’ (vi˜i◊ﬂ®dvaita). The Lord is
transcendent in himself (and essentially unknowable in his inner
essence, as R®m®nuja claims) but is known in the ritual process. The
                      The Tantric Body

question of the relation between doctrine and ritual in the tantric
traditions is complex, but the evidence of the Jay®khya and other
texts indicates a level of processual invariance between traditions.
The pattern of ritual remains constant, but is ﬁlled out with text- and
tradition-speciﬁc content, especially the mantras. The theological
distinction between self and transcendent Lord is suspended in
the ritual process and the subjectivity of the practitioner becomes
coterminous with the subjectivity of the Lord, an identiﬁcation that
is created and enacted in ritual, in the entextualisation of the body.
The ritual process continues with inner worship.


                          Inner Worship

The Jay®khya describes a process of visualisation for establishing
the supreme Lord within the heart envisaged as a throne (antara-
m®nasa-y®ga). During the inner worship, the practitioner visualises
the hierarchical cosmos in the forms of deities located within his
own body. The account that follows is from the Jay®khya, although
an almost identical account is found in the Lak◊m¬-tantra. Rastelli
shows how the throne, as visualised in this sequence, also occurs in
other Sam. hit®s.78
   We have here a constructed vision of the body in which the hier-
archical universe pervades the practitioner’s body from the genitals to
the heart.79 First, the power of the earth, the ®dh®ra-˜akti, is mapped
on to the penis; Rastelli notes that that this power corresponds
to the famous Goddess Kun. ¥alin¬,80 although she is not explicitly
mentioned in the Jay®khya. Above her is the ‘ﬁre of time’ (k®l®gni),
then the Tortoise (k‚rma) bearing the insignia of Vi◊n. u, the discus
and club. Above him is the cosmic snake Ananta, upon which Vi◊n. u
is represented as lying, in traditional mythology; above him is the
Earth goddess and above her at the level of the navel is the ocean of
milk. Out from this arises a white lotus which gives rise to sixteen
supports of the throne. These comprise the eight dispositions (bh®va)
of the buddhi, the four sacred scriptures or Vedas and the four ages
of the world (yuga). They support a white lotus, upon which are the
sun, moon and ﬁre. Above these, although not explicitly named in
                           The P®ñcar®tra                             

this sequence in the Jay®khya, is the ‘throne of being’ (bh®v®sana),
upon which rests the vehicle of Vi◊n. u, the great mythological bird
G®ru¥a, and the boar incarnation Var®ha. Vi◊n. u is invoked in due
course upon his mount. Each of these visions is in turn identiﬁed
with one of the hierarchical categories or tattvas of the S®n. khya
system, with the addition of two more tattvas, time (k®la) and lord-
ship (¬˜varatva), making a total of twenty-seven. I shall cite a long
passage of the constructed vision in the Jay®khya in order to present
some ﬂavour of these ritual, visionary texts, and in order that we
can demonstrate in concrete terms the entextualisation of the body.
The visualisation in the Jay®khya is described as follows:
  So having formerly become Vi◊n. u [through the puriﬁcation of the
  body previously described], the practitioner should then worship Vi◊n. u
  with the mental sacriﬁce. [] Imagining [the area] between the penis
  and the navel ﬁlled with four parts, one should visualise the energy
  whose form is the earth (§dh®ra-˜akti), above that the ﬁre of time
  [K®l®gni], above that Ananta, and then the Earth Goddess [Vasudha
  Dev¬]. [–b] From the place of the ‘bulb’ (kan. ¥a) to the navel is
  divided into four parts. Visualising the ocean of milk in the navel and
  then a lotus arising [out of it], extending as far as a thousand petals
  and whirling with a thousand rays [of light], having the appearance
  of a thousand rays, he should ﬁx the throne on its back. [c–b] The
  fourfold [dispositions] dharma, knowledge, detachment, and majesty,
  descend by means of their own mantras to the four [directions] of
  Fire [the south east] and so on [south west, north west and north
  east], ﬁxing those four up to the abode of the Lord ¡˜®na [the north
  east]. On the four feet of the throne they are white, with lion faces,
  but the forms of men in their body and possessing exceeding strength.
  [c–] The parts from the eastern direction up to the northern abode
  are ﬁxed with the opposites of dharma, knowledge, detachment, and
  majesty. These are of human form, blazing like the red bandhuka
  ﬂower. [–b] The four [scriptures] the R. g-veda and so on have the
  form of a horse-man, are yellow, and [situated] in between the east
  and the direction of the Lord [north-east], between the east and the
  direction of Fire [the south east], between the south-west and Varun. a
  [the west], and between the wind [north-west] and Varun. a [the west].
  [c–] The group of ages, namely Kr. ta and so on, have the form of
  a bull-man, are black, and are located in the directions between ¡˜®na
  [north-east] and Soma [north], between Antaka [another name for
  Yama, the south] and Agni [south-east], between Yama [south] and the
  demon [Yak◊asa, the south-west], and between the Moon [the north]
                      The Tantric Body

  and the wind [north-west]. [–b] They all have four arms; with two
  they support the throne and with two they make obeisance to the Lord
  of the universe. [c–b]
     Above them he should ﬁx ﬁrst a white lotus [and then] threefold
  [forms, namely sun moon and ﬁre], way above with those mantras, aris-
  ing from himself and previously articulated, O Narada. On the back of
  that he should establish both the King of Birds and the Boar. Having
  imagined [the area] from the navel to the heart pervaded by ﬁve equal
  sections, he should worship the mantra-throne. [c–].81

   In this complex ritual process the structure of the body is made
to correspond to the structure of the cosmos: the body becomes an
index of the cosmos, which, as we shall see, is itself conceptualised
in terms of the body. But this is a representation always mediated
by the text. The cosmos is represented in the text and the cosmos
within the body is represented in the text. The enactment of this
correspondence in daily ritual therefore makes the body conform to
the text. We can understand the text as body more clearly by paying
attention to the language of the texts themselves, particularly their
indexicality, and through the processes that are involved in their
reading.


                        External Worship

After creating himself as the deity, inscribing the body with the text
in visualisation and imposing mantras upon it, the practitioner is
ready to perform external worship (b®hya-y®ga), making offerings
to the deity in the physical world. The Jay®khya raises the question
that the performance of external worship may seem superﬂuous,82
and to the question as to why external worship should be performed
after the internal the Lak◊m¬-tantra says that while inner worship
removes karmic traces (v®san®) from internal causes, external wor-
ship removes karmic traces from external causes.83 The Jay®khya
describes the construction of a diagram (man. ¥ala) in which to
house the deity for the purpose of worship. Offerings are gathered
together and N®r®yan. a’s presence along with his retinue of deities
is invoked through mantra and visualisation and installed in the
man. ¥ala. Incense and food are offered to the deity, along with bell
                          The P®ñcar®tra                          

sounds and so on – in other words, a standard p‚j® for a Hindu
deity. Mantra repetition is performed with a rosary (ak◊am. ®l®),84
followed by the ﬁre offerings (homa) made into the ﬁre-pit (kun. ¥a),
as would occur in a standard Brahmanical rite.85 Some concluding
rites round off the ceremony and the practitioner is enjoined not
to forget the Lord.
    The ritual procedure for the initiate presented in the Jay®khya-
sam. hit® follows a standard pattern that in some sense shows the
conservative nature of tantric tradition in following a textually
prescribed ritual procedure and also shows the continuities with
standard, Brahmanical practice in the early medieval period. The
composers of the Jay®khya and the practitioners who followed the
text were not radicals trying to disrupt the Brahmanical system, but
practitioners upholding the traditional values of their community
through participating in the rites. The tantric P®ñcar®trin saw his
tradition as complementing and completing the vedic, and the deity
and practice of his cult as ensuring salvation. Through entextualising
the body in ritual he is making himself conform to the tradition and
attempting to undergo a transformation in text-speciﬁc ways. We will
look at further examples of this from the ˆaiva tradition before going
on to present an analysis of some of this material showing how the
indexical-I becomes identiﬁed with the I implied in the texts.
                                 

                     ˆaiva Siddh®nta




I      of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, the central tantric ˆaiva
    tradition which provides the normative rites, cosmology and
theological categories, we ﬁnd a similar process occurring as that in
the P®ñcar®tra. The ˆaiva texts prescribe not only ritual procedures
along with their theological justiﬁcation but behaviour for a whole
way of life. The texts lay down details of how tradition is internalised
and how the narrative of a life is to be made to conform to it through
a ritual pattern occurring over a lifetime, through control of the
general bodily habitus, and through developing tradition-speciﬁed
codes of conduct.
    The ritual manuals Soma˜ambhu-paddhati and ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-
paddhati (which quotes the former), are separated from the Jay®khya
by at least a couple of centuries, and their origins are in differ-
ent parts of the subcontinent: the Jay®khya is probably from the
Kashmir region,1 Soma˜ambhu (second half of the eleventh century
) was the abbot of a monastery at Golaka (golak¬-maﬂha) in South
India, probably in Tamil Nadu or the Telugu region, himself in a
lineage of compilers of ritual manuals;2 and the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-
paddhati, which postdates Soma˜ambhu, is probably from Kerala.3
Considering the regional, temporal and cultic diversity of these texts,
it is therefore very striking that such common process occurs at the
level of ritual representation as, while there is a line of development
                         ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

from Soma˜ambhu to ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva, there is no such direct
historical link with the JS. While we need to raise the question as to
whether a repeated ritual sequence that shares a structural process
with another text is the same, there is clear textual evidence that the
texts follow a sequence of puriﬁcation of place and body, divinisa-
tion of the body, inner worship followed by external worship. We
are arguably looking in the medieval tantric traditions at a shared
pattern of ritual behaviour, which may be accompanied by different
cosmological terms and a different understanding of precisely what
is occurring. The monist theologian Abhinavagupta, for example,
claims in his commentary on the Par®tr¬˜ik® that the ritual sequence
in the text should be understood as occurring within consciousness
itself,4 thereby critiquing the ˆaiva Siddh®nta view that ritual itself
is efﬁcacious in liberation, and raising the question as to whether
a ritual sequence that appears similar or identical at a surface level
is nevertheless quite different because of the different metaphysics
underlying it. While this is a valid point, I would simply wish to
claim that at a descriptive phenomenological level there are shared
ritual terminologies and processes that suggest that in terms of ritual
action there is a constant pattern across traditions even though there
may be a divergent theological superstructure. Indeed, more than
this, Hélène Brunner has convincingly argued that three Tantras
seem to share a common ritual inheritance with regard to daily ˆaiva
ritual, namely the Svacchanda-tantra, the Mr. gendra-tantra and the
K®mik®gama. The Svacchanda is purportedly non-dualist and from
the north, while the Mr. gendra and K®mika are from the south and
dualistic, yet they all participate in a common ritual heritage which
is later described by Soma˜ambhu and those who base their own
manuals on his. Indeed, Brunner observes that the three Tantras
form the base of modern ˆaiva ritual in the south, as can be wit-
nessed in the ˆaiva temples of Tamil Nadu.5
   To illustrate the ritual process let us begin, as we did with the
P®ñcar®tra, with cosmology in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, or how the
cosmos is mapped on to the body in the ritual process, which is
a mapping of the self and placing of the self in a cosmological
context. While the P®ñcar®tra used the S®m. khya categories, the ˆaiva
Siddh®nta developed this much more, adding eleven ˆaiva categories
                      The Tantric Body

or tattvas to the twenty-ﬁve S®m. khya ones. The pattern of supreme,
mixed and impure creation that we ﬁnd in some P®ñcar®tra texts we
also ﬁnd in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta. Following the pattern of the previ-
ous chapter, we will begin with the cosmological account in a ˆaiva
Siddh®nta as presented in Bhojadeva’s Tattvaprak®˜a and Bhaﬂﬂa
R®makan. ﬂha’s commentary on the Kiran. a-tantra. We will then be in
a position to move on to an account of ritual, showing how the body
becomes populated with the cosmic hierarchy; in the terminology I
have developed here, how the body becomes entextualised and the
cosmos mapped on to the self.


                   Śaiva Siddhānta Doctrine

Doctrinally the ˆaiva Siddh®nta is ‘dualistic’ in maintaining an
ontological distinction between self and transcendent Lord, though
it might more accurately be called pluralistic in maintaining not
only this distinction, but a distinction between self, Lord and uni-
verse which itself comprises innumerable particularities (although
these particularities stem from a common substrate).6 Bhojadeva (c.
–)7 in his Illumination of the Categories (Tattvaprak®˜a)
sums up the doctrine in his opening verses, that in the ˆaiva scrip-
tures (˜aiv®gama) the principal topic is the triad of Lord (pati),
bound soul or beast (pa˜u), and universe or bond (p®˜a).8 The soul
is likened to a cow tethered by a rope, to be freed from its tether
by the Lord. This bond has ﬁve components, which the commenta-
tor ˆr¬ Kum®radeva, citing a scripture, lists as pollution (mala),
action (karma), illusion-power (m®y®), the universe, that arises from
that illusion (m®yotthamakhilam jagat) and the power of concealing
(tirodh®nakar¬ ˜aktiΩ).9 The innumerable souls, although in reality
distinct, are bound within the universe from which they may be freed
(mukta) by ˆiva’s grace (pras®da). Once freed they realise themselves
to be ˆivas or to be like or equal to ˆiva (˜ivatulya, ˜ivasam®ya), but
they remain ontologically distinct. Only ˆiva has always been free
(an®dimukta).10
    The general cosmological function of the ﬁve components of
p®˜a is to bind souls into the cycle of transmigration through the
                         ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

innumerable worlds of the cosmos. Bhojadeva – as ˆaiva Siddh®nta
texts generally – classiﬁes kinds of souls according to their degree of
entrapment by these bonds, namely (and I follow Goodall’s reading
here11) those who are separated from fetters because of knowledge
or consciousness (vijñ®na-kevala), but still entrapped by impurity
(mala); those who are separated from fetters due to the cosmic dis-
solution (pralaya-kevala); those who are entrapped by both impurity
and action (karma); and those who are not separated from all bonds
and possess the power of limited action (sakala), entrapped by all
three – pollution, action and illusion-power (m®y®).12 The ﬁrst two
of these categories are also known by the names vijñ®n®kala or
vijñ®nakevalin and pralay®kala or pralay®kevalin.13 The degree of
entrapment is their degree of impurity. R®makan. ﬂha in his com-
mentary says that the term pa˜u only refers to those souls (®tman)
who are subject to impurity (samala). Of these, he says, there are two
types, those who have the force called kal® and those who do not.
Those who possess the power of kal® are in turn of two types, those
with subtle bodies (s‚k◊ma-deha) and those with gross bodies (sth‚la-
deha). Those without kal® are also of two types, those without kal®
because of knowledge or higher awareness, the vijñ®n®kevalins, and
those without it because of cosmic dissolution, the pralay®kevalins.14
The term kal® in the sense here is rendered by Goodall as ‘power
of limited action’, although it is also used on a broader cosmological
canvas to refer to levels of the hierarchical cosmos within which the
tattvas operate (see below).15 This power of limited agency shows
that the sakala souls have the power of action and can accumulate
new karma through their action in the lower worlds, while the vijñ®na
and prayala souls, on this account, are devoid of the power of agency
and only reap the fruits of their actions.
   The consciousness-only souls are further subdivided by Bhoja into
those whose impurity is completely ﬁnished (sam®ptakalu◊a) and those
for whom it is not (asam®ptakalu◊a). Out of the former ˆiva makes
eight ‘Lords of Wisdom’ (vidye˜a or, more commonly, vidye˜vara) and
out of the latter a countless number of mantras.16 There are a couple
of problems here in that if the eight Lords are free, then in some
sense they are not entrapped by the power of impurity, yet in order
for them to act they need to be embodied, although their bodies are
                     The Tantric Body

pure and not made of m®y®, unlike the pralayakevalins which are held
in the worlds of m®y®.17 These eight Lords are highly signiﬁcant in
cosmological terms, for through them ˆiva creates or impels the lower
levels of creation. In his commentary, Aghora˜iva names them as
Ananta, S‚k◊ma, ˆivottama, Ekanetra, Ekarudra, Trim‚rti, ˆr¬kan. ﬂha
and ˆikhan. ¥in, who are qualiﬁed to perform the ﬁve actions in the
lower worlds (of creation, maintenance, destruction, concealing and
revealing).18 Among them Ananta is the most important as ˆiva’s
agent or regent. Like the rest of the Vidye˜varas, says the Kiran. a-
tantra, his body is pure (˜uddhadeha), he is omniscient (sarvajñ®) and
he reveals all the scriptures.19 In his commentary R®makan. ﬂha says
that the vidye˜varas teach all the ˆaiva Siddh®nta scriptures. Ananta
has a body simply because he has the cosmological function of the
creation of lower worlds, or more speciﬁcally the stimulation of m®y®
to evolve. His body is therefore ‘pure’ in not being made of m®y® but
being made from a pure origin (˜uddhayonimaya) which is not due
to the results of past action (akarmaja).20 While these eight Lords
express ˆiva’s will, they do not appear to have agency themselves but
only the agency of ˆiva; they are free of kal®, the power of limited
agency in the lower worlds.
   Bhoja divides the dissolution-only beings in a similar fashion to
the Vidye˜varas, into those whose pollution and karma have matured
and so enter liberation and those whose pollution and karma have
not matured and who exist as subtle bodies.21 Presumably the sense
here is that these two kinds refer to beings who, because of their
karma, have become pralayakevalins and who will either, in the course
of time, leave that state and go into ﬁnal liberation from there or
return to the lower worlds, being born in wombs due to the impulse
of karma, although Aghora˜iva observes that those whose mala has
matured enter liberation through the door of the descent of power
(˜aktip®ta).22 Indeed, he quotes a text that says that liberated pra-
layakevalins become Lords of worlds (bhuvane˜®Ω). The souls with
limited agency (sakala), who have all three impurities, inhabit the
lower worlds of creation, although they too include divine beings.
Among them, says Bhoja, ˆiva makes a hundred and eighteen Lords
of mantra (mantre˜a), linked to the power of limited agency, higher
powers which animate mantras as sound formulas in this world.23
                         ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

   The cosmological function and consistency of accounts of these
levels of beings are not always clear in our sources; there is some
variation between, for example, the dualist ˆaiva Siddh®nta account
exempliﬁed by Bhoja and the monistic ‘Kashmiri’ ˆaiva doctrine
seven experients, exempliﬁed by K◊emar®ja,24 whose origin is the
M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra. But the point that is important for our
purposes is that this hierarchy of souls, graded in accordance with
their degree of pollution, their subtlety, and power as agents of
ˆiva, is tied into a system of ritual. The souls whose pollution has
matured (parip®kamala), says Bhoja, ˆiva joins to the highest cat-
egory or level of the cosmos (˜iva-tattva) through the descent of
power (˜aktip®ta) at initiation (d¬k◊®) when he takes on the form of a
teacher or master (®c®rya).25 Aghora˜iva quotes a text that says that,
on account of a strong descent of power (tivra˜aktip®ta) through
the master, the lost soul (sam. s®rin) is not reborn again but becomes
ﬁlled and pervaded with the condition of being ˆiva (˜ivatva).26 This
condition of being ˆiva, ˆiva-ness or equality with ˆiva (˜ivatulya,
˜ivasam®ya) is the purpose of the bound soul’s existence; without
being joined to the structures of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta tradition
through the grace of ˆiva, they remain wandering through the
manifold universe according to the fruits of their actions. Indeed,
if the universe has a purpose, for texts such as the Mr. gendr®gama
and Kiran. a-tantra it is to give souls experience in order that in due
course they may achieve liberation; the purpose of the universe is
to free bound souls27 which allows them to burn up the fruits of
their action and to be receptive to ˆiva’s grace. Because souls have
no beginning in this system, in the act of creation and in the act
of concealing himself ˆiva is allowing souls the opportunity to be
liberated and free, just as he is himself. ˆiva unites these remain-
ing bound souls with experience (bhogabhukti) appropriate to their
actions,28 and so they wander until liberated through the ripening
of their bonds, through the ˆaiva Siddh®nta ritual structure, and
ultimately through ˆiva’s grace. The suffering of souls is a kind of
medicine that in the end procures their desired goal of liberation.29
The souls thus have bodies made of m®y® in the lower creation
in order to experience worlds. Without a body a world cannot be
experienced and liberation cannot be attained; only through the body
                       The Tantric Body

is the experience of a world undergone and only through a body is
liberation reached.30 In one sense the universe is simply ˆiva’s sport
and dance, yet in another sense it is a manifestation of his grace to
allow beginningless souls to gain freedom.


                      The Tattva Hierarchy

For the ˆaiva Siddh®nta the structure of the universe is linked to
the degree or level of concealment of ˆiva. The universe unfolds
in increasing degrees of coagulation, from subtle to gross, which
increasingly entrap the soul, who becomes lost within it and subject
to suffering due to pollution, karma and illusion-power. As with other
Hindu systems, the ˆaiva cosmos is created, or rather manifested
from a quiescent state, and destroyed or reabsorbed over and over
again over vast periods of time. Through his energy or ˆakti, the
Goddess, ˆiva acts upon pure substance in potential called the ‘great
power of illusion’ (mah®m®y®) or ‘the drop’ (bindu), which then
develops the ‘pure’ levels of the cosmos. From bindu then emerges
the material substrate of the lower universe, the power of illusion or
m®y®, from which emerge the elements that comprise the lower or
impure universe. Bindu and m®y® are the material causes (up®d®na)
of the worlds.31 After a period of time the universe is reabsorbed
back to the level of m®y®, and in a great dissolution back to the level
of bindu. After a period of sleep the process begins over again.32 I
have rendered m®y® as ‘illusion-power’, which, although somewhat
dissatisfactory, conveys the idea of m®y® as a lower emanation of
ˆakti, a power that conceals ˆiva and entraps lower souls through
the operation of the ‘coverings’ (kañcuka) that include limited agency
and time.33 For the ˆaiva Siddh®nta m®y® is a substance (vastur‚pa),
the eternal (nitya) root (m‚la) of the universe, says Bhoja.34 As
substance it is not in itself illusory or unreal, but is rather the cause
and context of the soul’s illusion that it is entrapped in the lower
worlds. Indeed, the Kiran. a-tantra calls m®y® a ‘seductress’ (mohin¬)
because through her the soul has experience (bhoga) of external
objects (vi◊aya),35 although we must not forget that m®y® is not
a conscious being for the Siddh®nta, but a form or force that is
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

insentient (ja¥a).36 The ˆaiva Siddh®nta presents a realist ontology
in that the cosmos is a real substance that entraps the soul.

                           bindu/mah®m®y®
                                   ↓
                                 m®y®
                                   ↓
                                prakr. ti

    A number of terminologies are used to describe this process of un-
folding. Perhaps the most important is the system of the categories or
tattvas. The ˆaivas add eleven to the twenty-ﬁve S®m. khya ones (see
ﬁgure). This is most important because it is an attempt to explain
in detail the unfolding universe and the soul’s entrapment within
it, and is also integral to ˆaiva soteriology and the ritual system.
The cosmos unfolds in order that souls can experience the results
of their actions, and so tattva hierarchy describes that entrapment.
Yet through understanding this entrapment and, above all, through
the ritual reabsorption of the tattvas, the soul can become free. The
tattvas are therefore the cause of both bondage and liberation in one
sense, although the ultimate cause is ˆiva’s grace.
    Prakr. ti becomes a lower manifestation or reﬂection of m®y®,
which itself is a lower manifestation of bindu. Bindu is identiﬁed
with the ﬁrst, the ˆiva-tattva from which emerge the other pure
tattvas, namely ˆakti-tattva, Sad®˜iva or S®d®khya-tattva, ¡˜vara-
tattva and ˆuddhavidy®-tattva. M®y®, itself classed as a tattva,
produces those in ‘mixed’ creation, and the prakr. ti tattva produces
the lower categories as described in S®m. khya.37 While thirty-six is
a standard number in the texts, there is some variation of content.
              .
The Matangaparame˜var®gama, an up®gama of the Parame˜var®gama,
lists the twenty-ﬁve S®m. khya tattvas replacing matter (prakr. ti) with
the ‘unmanifest’ (avyakta) and ‘quality’ (gun. a), and in the pure
creation listing dissolution (laya), joyous experience (bhoga), gov-
ernance (adhik®ra), pure knowledge (vidy®), and m®y®.38 Other texts
have some variation on the thirty-six and the Mr. gendr®gama lists
thirty-nine.39
    The tattvas are not in themselves sentient but are categories
that comprise the bodies and coverings of souls, and are also levels
                         The Tantric Body

       The thirty-six categories or tattvas of Śaivism

                             PURE CREATION
                               . ˆiva
                               . ˆakti
                               . Sad®˜iva
                               . ¡˜vara
                               . ˆuddha Vidy®


                            IMPURE CREATION

                       . Māyā
                          ﬁve coverings or kañcukas
                       . Kal® – particularity of authorship
                       . Vidy® – limited knowledge
                       . R®ga – passion/ attachment
                      . K®la – limited time
                      . Niyati – spacial constraint
                      . Puru◊a – limited self


                      .   Prakr. ti – matter/ nature
                      .   Buddhi – higher mind
                      .   Aham. k®ra – ego
                      .   Manas – mind

organs of cognition   organs of action      subtle elements    gross elements

. Hearing           . Speech           . Sound           . Space
. Touching          . Handling         . Touch           . Air
. Seeing            . Locomotion       . Form            . Fire
. Tasting           . Excretion        . Taste           . Water
. Smelling          . Generation       . Smell           . Earth




of experience for those souls. Thus the ˆiva-tattva is not to be
confused with ˆiva, the transcendent efﬁcient cause of creation.
There are, therefore, a number of English renderings of the term
tattva whose semantic ﬁeld incorporates the notions of ‘reality’,
‘essence’, ‘principle’ and ‘category’. While interpreting the tattvas
in a non-dualist way as emanations of consciousness, the non-dualist
                             ˆaiva Siddh®nta                         

ˆaivas nevertheless adopt the Siddh®nta system. Their readings of
the tattva hierarchy are illuminating. For the non-dualist theologian
Abhinavagupta, tattva designates a constituent of a level of reality
(vastu, prameya), a principle underlying reality or a level of it (for
example, in the sense of earth being an appearance of an underlying
principle of hardness), and a category of perception (pad®rtha).40
These are furthermore integrated into a system of correspondences
with other hierarchical cosmological schemes, all of which become
important in ritual procedures.


                             The Six Paths

The cosmological schemes are collectively known as the ‘six paths’
(◊a¥adhvan); they are found or mentioned in most texts.41 The term
designates different paths of emanation and reabsorption of the
cosmos that the soul takes on its symbolic journey in ritual back
to and beyond the source of the cosmos. These paths are named
varn. a (phonemes), mantra, pada (words), kal® (cosmic regions),
tattva, and bhuvana (worlds). Both the ˆaiva Siddh®nta and the
non-Saiddh®ntika systems maintain the doctrine of the six paths.
For the monistic ˆaivas these are manifestations of consciousness
paired in a hierarchical sequence, kal® with varn. a, tattva with mantra,
and bhuvana with pada, whereas for the realist ˆaiva Siddh®nta, as
Brunner-Lachaux observes, they are traced in matter (m®y® and
bindu) and must be understood as parallel to each other and not in
a hierarchical sequence.42

      Path of Sound (v®caka)               Path of Objects (v®cya)
         varn. a (phoneme)                      kal® (power)
              mantra                               tattva
           pada I (word)                       bhuvana (world)

There is no space to describe them in detail (for which see the work
of Brunner and Padoux),43 but the idea can illustrated with a brief
account of the path of the worlds, the bhuvana adhvan.
   The path of the worlds (bhuvana) is particularly interesting as
it clearly illustrates the idea that the body contains within it the
                      The Tantric Body

cosmos and that the ritual dissolution of the cosmos in the body is
a dissolution of all possible realms of experience into which a soul
could be born. The Siddh®nta texts formally contain  worlds,
so many in each kal®, although there are many more, this number
being notional. Indeed, the listing of worlds that beings inhabit is an
important and interesting feature of some Tantras, which allows us
to understand the vast cosmological imagination of the composers of
these texts and enables us to see how later developments of tradition
or new traditions did not abandon the old but built up further worlds
upon the old. For example, in the nivr.¯ tti kal® the Raurav®gama
contains  worlds, beginning with the lowest of K®l®gni,44 which
are recapitulated with some variation in other §gamas and in the
Soma˜ambhu-paddahti.45
   The non-Saiddh®ntika Tantras of the north follow the same
structure and list many of the same worlds. For example, the non-
Saiddh®ntika M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra lists among the various worlds
in the nivr. tti-kal® six types of beings in the community of beings
(bh‚tagr®ma) who inhabit the material world, namely those of the
vegetable kingdom (sth®vara), insects and other crawling things
(sarpj®ti), the birds (pak◊aj®ti), wild (mr. ga) and domestic (p®˜ava)
animals, and the human world (m®nu◊abhuvana).46 Indeed, the M®lin¬
may have been a dualist text like those of the Siddh®nta.47
   While the basic pattern is fairly simple in the sense that the
scheme represents the two dimensions of the hierarchical universe,
time and space, word and object, with all the paths parallel to each
other and each path arranged in a graded sequence from supreme
to subtle to gross, the details of the paths are nevertheless quite
complex and each path is pervaded by the others.48
   Although there is no doubt an explanatory dimension to the six
paths, the function of this whole complex structure lies primarily in
ritual. It is only in the ritual context that the scheme comes to life
and becomes embodied. As the universe is populated with multiple
worlds, levels and beings, so the practitioner’s body is populated
with worlds, levels and beings, themselves derived from the textual
sources of the tradition. The destruction of the six paths within
the body enacted in daily ritual leads to the soul’s liberation at
death or the soul becoming a Vijñ®nakevalin until its ﬁnal liberation
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                              

at a great dissolution.49 The body is the meeting point or media-
tion between the universal and the particular, in that it enacts the
particularity of revelation, of text, and at the same time enacts the
proclaimed universality of the cosmic structure revealed in the texts.
The entextualisation of the body makes the body particular to text
and tradition, but this is also understood as the universalisation of
the body through locating the universe of beings within it.


                 The Ritual Process: Initiation

Initiation conducts the soul to perfection from the human condi-
tion (pum. sbh®va) in which the soul is located at the level of the
puru◊a-tattva,50 by purifying the six paths within the body. This
puriﬁcation overcodes the vedic body with the tantric cosmology;
indeed some texts claim that ˆaiva initiation eradicates caste. The
Raurav®gama, for example, lists a number of ˆaiva groups and seems
to say that simply following and adopting the ways of the ˆaiva are
sufﬁcient and that this constitutes initiation. In constructing the
body through the ˆaiva rites (˜ivasam. sk®ra) and following the ˆaiva
path one thereby deconstructs the vedic body, and the Brahman and
outcaste can both become ˆivas. Adopting the bodily habitus of the
ˆaiva ensures liberation:
  From combining ashes and rudr®k◊a beads and from binding [the
  body] by the ritual process of ˆiva, wearing the topknot and sacred
  thread, one is said to be initiated. A living being should devote himself
  to pure ˜aiva [path] in this Tantra. By giving himself over to the
  ˜®stra he is said to be initiated into the ˜®stra. Wearing matted hair or
  shaved, the teacher of ˆiva makes entrance before the immovable icon
     .
  (lin ga). They say he is a living Mahe˜vara. Entering the condition of
  the Mahe˜vara he abides possessing the mark [of the ˆaiva]. Brahman
  or outcaste, with good qualities or bad, combining ash and rudr®k◊a
  beads, without doubt [he becomes] a ˆiva. After becoming a ˆaiva in
  this way he should act as a ˆaiva.51

   While the Raurav®gama is unusual in not seeming to advocate
here a formal initiation, acting like a ˆaiva generally means not
only wearing a chignon or shaved head and bearing the marks of a
ˆaiva, but having undergone formal initiation and consecration. Most
                       The Tantric Body

ˆaiva texts follow almost the same ritual sequence as we found in
the Jay®khya-sam. hit®. Generally absent from the Saiddh®ntika and
more closely aligned vedic traditions is the sexualised ritual of the
non-Saiddh®ntika traditions, although it is not wholly absent; sexual
imagery is clearly present in visualisation and worship of the ˆiva
  .
lin ga, the phallic representation of ˆiva embedded in its pedestal
throne (p¬ﬂha) or vulva (yoni).52 For a good account of the ˆaiva
Siddh®nta ritual structure I refer the reader to the clear description
by Davis and, especially for more detailed treatment, to Hélène
Brunner-Lachaux’s edition and translation of the Soma˜ambhu-
paddhati. This is a milestone in the study of the tantic traditions,
a major work of scholarship; its notes highlighting intertextuality
and useful diagrams of how the cosmos is mapped on to the body
have become a fundamental resource for the study of Tantrism.53 It
is to Brunner-Lachaux’s edition and commentary that I largely turn
in the following, abbreviated account, in order to demonstrate the
ˆaiva entextualisation of the body. ˆaiva ritual – as with all tantric
ritual – is classiﬁed as daily rites (nitya-karman), occasional rites
(naimittika-karman) and rites for a desired goal (k®mya-karman).
This classiﬁcation provides all that is necessary for somebody to live
the life of a ˆaiva Siddh®ntin and to form their life in accordance
with the tradition.
    The ˆaiva Siddh®ntin is constructed through the rites, with the
texts of tradition being mapped on to the body. The occasional
rites refer especially to initiation (d¬k◊®) and funeral rites (antye◊ﬂi)
which reﬂect the former. Most important for the ˆaiva Siddh®ntin
is initiation, for through this he is given access to the tradition, its
texts and rites, and guaranteed eventual liberation.
    Initiation presupposes the master. The master of the tradition,
called the ®c®rya, guru or de˜ika, is crucial in the transference of
power to the disciple and in teaching the rites and mantras. The
master has knowledge of ˆiva and the traditions, and mediates be-
tween the practitioner and transcendent goal.54 This is not a comment
on the inner awareness of the master; rather, the master is socially
deﬁned as having himself undergone a particular kind of consecra-
tion (the ®c®ry®bhi◊eka) that is itself indicative of his degree of
traditional knowledge and ability to install icons, consecrate temples
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                            

and perform initiations. It is less the intellectual and moral quali-
ties of the master that are important (although these are desirable,
along with no bodily impurities) and more the ability and authority
(adhik®ra) to perform the correct rites at the correct time; the ability
to act as a channel for the transmission of tradition. This ability is a
formal, socially acknowledged qualiﬁcation that functions independ-
ently of the inner qualities or personality of the teacher. Indeed,
during the rites of initiation the master becomes ˆiva. It is ˆiva who
initiates the disciple through the master. The most important quality
that the disciple (˜i◊ya) should possess is the quality of devotion to
the master (gurubhakti), which is thereby devotion to ˆiva.55
   The Tantras contain many kinds of initiation, and there is vari-
ability in the texts from formal acceptance by the master with mini-
mal rites to more elaborate ritual procedures. In some texts, those
of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta among them, initiation is formalised with no
anticipation of the disciple’s inner condition; in others the disciple is
required to display signs of possession by the deities of the man. ¥ala,
such as trembling which reﬂects important differences within tantric
traditions. Soma˜ambhu, basing his account on ˆaiva revelation,
describes three initiations – the general (samaya), particular (vi˜e◊a)
and liberating (nirv®n. a) – although Brunner-Lachaux shows how
the particular is assimilated into the general and how the distinction
into three initiations is later.56 The general initiation (samaya-d¬k◊®)
provides entry into the tradition, while the liberating liberation
(nirv®n. a-d¬k◊®) ensures ﬁnal liberation at death. The structure of
initiation follows the pattern of types of disciple as we have seen
in the P®ñcar®tra. Thus one who has undergone the samaya-d¬k◊®
is called a samayin and one who has undergone the nirv®n. a-d¬k◊®
is a putraka, a son of ˆiva. There can be one or two further stages
in the development of the disciple, should he become a teacher
(®c®rya) through the rite of consecration (®c®ry®bhi◊eka),57 which
means he then has the authority to initiate disciples. Alternatively
there is formal recognition for someone to become a seeker of power
and pleasure in higher worlds, a s®dhaka, through that consecration
(s®dhak®bhi◊eka).58
   The distinction between the ®c®rya and s®dhaka reﬂects an im-
portant distinction between seekers after liberation (mumuk◊u) and
                      The Tantric Body

seekers after power and pleasure in higher worlds (bubhuk◊u). The
latter, says Brunner-Lachaux, desire liberation ultimately, but also
desire supernormal power (siddhi) in this and future lives.59 It is,
of course, legitimate to explain the distinction in terms of per-
sonal preference – and this is what the tradition does, as reﬂected
in the desiderative terms, ‘those who desire’ liberation or power
– but we could also be witnessing here an echo or remnant of an
earlier s®dhaka tradition that has become assimilated into the ˆaiva
Siddh®nta system. The ®c®rya s®dhaka distinction reﬂects the ear-
lier distinction between the path of mantras, which is considered
to be a path of power, and the higher path (atim®rga) classiﬁed
as having only liberation as its goal.60 It also reﬂects a distinction
found in the Mr. gendr®gama between the ‘elemental’ (bhautika)
and ‘unorthodox’ (na◊ﬂhika) s®dhaka, the former being attached to
lower goals such as riches (bh‚ti), power, and obtaining an agreeable
woman (satpatn¬parigraha), the latter to liberation.61 Indeed, the term
‘elemental’ (bhautika) retains the ambiguity of the English rendering,
suggesting both the basic elements (earth and so on) and a class of
supernatural beings who possess people (bh‚tas) and from whom fol-
lowers of cremation-ground Tantrism sought controlled possession
in order to gain power, especially the power of ﬂight.
    In the initiation procedures we see how the initiate is formed
through the tradition being mapped on to his body and how the
narrative of his life is made to conform to the narrative of tradi-
tion to the extent of his receiving a new name, and his inner life,
including his dreams, becoming interpreted within the boundaries
of tradition. The actual ritual sequence of the communal initiation
involves preliminary rites that include the formation of a circle
diagram (man. ¥ala) into which the deities of the ˆaiva pantheon are
installed, homage to the guardians of the portals to the man. ¥ala, and
preparation and performance of the ﬁre ritual (homa). The communal
initiation proceeds with the master identifying himself with ˆiva,
placing ˆiva and his throne in the body of the disciple, and placing
the hand of ˆiva (˜ivahasta) on his head, thereby conveying initiation
to him.62 The vi˜e◊a-d¬k◊® completes the task of constructing the
disciple as a samayin, the characteristic feature of which is the guru
transporting the soul (®tman) of the disciple to the womb of the
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                            

Goddess of Speech (V®g¬˜var¬), who has been installed in the ﬁre.63
He is then born from her. While symbolically he is clearly a ‘son
of ˆiva’, as ˆiva in the form of V®g¬˜vara is her consort, he is not
technically termed a putraka until after the next level of initiation,
the nirv®n. a-d¬k◊®.
   The nirv®n. a-d¬k◊® is the most important rite in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta,
which grants access to eventual liberation. Once having undergone
this rite there is no turning back. The ritual itself takes two days, as
described by Soma˜ambhu; the ﬁrst day comprises preliminary rites
(adhiv®sana), followed on the second day by the initiation (d¬k◊®)
itself.64 The adhiv®sana rites are performed in a sacriﬁcial pavilion
(man. ¥apa), the same as for the preliminary initiation. It is here
that we begin to see the explicit entextualisation of the disciple’s
body. The main feature of this rite is that the master installs in the
body of the disciple the totality of the cosmos contained in all the
levels, and the entextualised body is then itself transferred to the
substitute of a cord that extends his whole length. In his visualisa-
tion the master enters the central channel of the disciple’s body
through the aperture at the crown of the head. Having gone down
to the heart, the master then leaves the body by the same route in
his imagination, taking the disciple’s soul with him along with the
constitutents of the universe. He brings the soul and constitutents
of the universe into his own heart through the aperture at his own
crown, and ﬁnally emits them from there, establishing the disciple’s
soul and cosmos on the cord. This cord (p®˜a), which represents
the universe that binds his soul also represents the hidden channel
(n®¥¬) that pervades the vertical axis of the body. All the levels of
reality need to be puriﬁed, which means detaching them from the
soul. In theory any of the six ways can function to purify the soul
in this way, but Soma˜ambhu gives the puriﬁcation by the way of
the kal®s. The ﬁve kal®s are established by the master in the body
and transferred on to the cord through ny®sa; their puriﬁcation is
the puriﬁcation of all the other paths as well. As Brunner-Lachaux
remarks, the rite is very long because the master must extract each
of the kal®s from the disciple’s body to place on the cord and must
extract the disciple’s very soul, to be placed in the cord also. In this
way, Brunner-Lachaux remarks, ‘the cord thus prepared is the image
                      The Tantric Body

of the disciple, with his ®tman imprisoned by bonds (hence the name
p®˜as‚tra, “cord of bonds”).’65 The disciple spends the night in the
pavilion, and the d¬k◊® proper commences the next day after the
master has interpreted his dreams. If the dreams are inauspicious,
the effects are redressed by expiatory rites (pr®ya˜citta).
   The second day of the rites comprises a repetition of the ﬁrst
initiations, after which the cord is suspended from the topknot of
the disciple and each kal® is puriﬁed in turn, beginning with nivr. tti,
so enacting the reabsorption of the cosmos. This involves the master
imaging all the different worlds that the disciple could be born into,
within that realm. The master visualises the sexual union of ˆiva
and ˆakti in the forms of V®g¬˜vara and V®g¬˜var¬ and places the
soul of the disciple into the womb of V®g¬˜var¬. Soma˜ambhu’s text
reads as follows:
  . He [the master] should declare to the Vidhi [Brahman] that
  which is to be done by your grace. ‘O Brahman, I will initiate this
  mumuk◊u according to [your] authority’. . Then he should invoke
  the red Goddess V®g¬˜var¬ with the heart [mantra], who is the cause
  of the sixfold way in the form of will, knowledge and action. . He
  should worship and satisfy the Goddess and afterwards [he should
  worship and satisfy] V®g¬˜vara in the same way, the cause of agitation
  in all wombs. . [Then] in the hollow of the heart, with the weapon
  [mantra] beginning with the seed syllable and ending with HUM. PHAT.,
  he should knock his [the disciple’s] heart and should enter it, knowing
  the rule. . The consciousness of the disciple in the heart is like a
  spark. [The master] should then separate it with the Jye◊ﬂΩ® [mantra
  so that the soul is] joined by bonds to the place of nivr. tti: om. h®m.
  ham. h®m. haΩ hum. phaﬂ. With [the mantra] om. h®m. ham. h®m. sv®h®,
  he pulls [the soul] up with the hook gesture when he breathes in and
  mentally grasping it with the ®tmamantra, he can then unite it to his
  own soul. Om. h®m. ham. h®m. ®tmane namaΩ [homage to the self].
  . Visualising the sexual union of the parents, he breathes out and
  takes the consciousness [of the disciple] from Brahman through the
  successive stages of the Lords of the kal®s to the place of ˆiva.66 .
  Having offered the rite of impregnation, [the master] should cast [the
  soul] into the womb of V®g¬˜var¬ and simultaneously into all wombs,
  with the arising gesture associated with the Goddess V®m®. [The
  accompanying mantra is] om. h®m. ham. h®m. ®tmane namaΩ. . With
  the same mantra he offers worship and nourishes [the self] ﬁve times.
  With the heart [mantra] he should form a body for him [the disciple]
                           ˆaiva Siddh®nta                             

   in all wombs. . He should not perform the rite of producing a male
   because [it may be] the body of a woman and so on, and [he should
   not perform] the ritual of parting the hair according to the sacred rite
   because the body may be blind and so on. . With the ˜iras [mantra
   the guru] brings about birth of all the embodied ones simultaneously.
   Then again with the ˜ikh® [mantra] he should visualise their appropri-
   ate rank (adhik®ra). . With the kavaca mantra he should visualise
   their experience which is the erroneous identiﬁcation of the self with
   its objects, and with the weapon mantra [he should visualise] the dis-
   solution. . With the ˆiva [mantra] he performs the puriﬁcation of
   the currents, with the heart [mantra] the puriﬁcation of the tattvas,
   and for each [of the rites] from the rite of conception, he should offer
   ﬁve oblations in due order.67

    In this way the master extracts the soul from the disciple, places
it in himself, transports it to the realm of ˆiva and then into the
womb of the Goddess V®g¬˜var¬, who is located in the sacred ﬁre.
This visualisation is accompanied by the appropriate section of
the cord being cast into the ﬂames. In entering V®g¬˜var¬’s womb,
the disciple’s soul is entering all wombs, and being born from her
represents the end of all other births in that realm. This birth is
accompanied by three rites, which completely consume all remaining
karma appropriate to that level, namely the rites of adhik®ra (‘rank’,
‘authority’), bhoga (‘enjoyment’, ‘experience’) and laya (‘dissolu-
tion’), which we are familiar with from the Jay®khya-sam. hit® (see
pp. –). The master provokes the soul’s birth, its correct place
in the cosmic order, its experiences, and its erroneous identiﬁcation
with sense objects, through visualisation, through ritual gesture and,
especially, through uttering the appropriate mantra. The following
rites eradicate all trace of the soul in the realm of nivr. tti, detaching
all exhausted karma, parts of m®y®, and partially the power of mala.
The master cuts the appropriate section of the cord representing
nivr. tti and burns it in the ﬁre. He then retrieves the soul of the
disciple from the ﬁre and places it in the next, higher section of the
cord. The process of puriﬁcation occurs over again for the remaining
four kal®s. With the burning of the last kal®, ˜®ntyat¬t®, the soul is
puriﬁed and replaced in the disciple’s body.
    The passage from Soma˜ambhu’s text, quoted above, is striking
in a number of ways. It is rich in references, indicating the semantic
                      The Tantric Body

density of ritual action. The rite is a construction of the self, or
rather the construction of a new self, whose bonds of action, illusion
and pollution – at least at the level of nivr. tti-kal® – are destroyed,
so that all that remains are the fruits of action that the disciple
needs to work out in his present life as one initiated (and so ensured
of liberation in due course). The term used for this construction
is sam. sk®ra, ‘put together’, the same term used in the vedic ritual
construction of the rites of passage. There is an implicit identi-
ﬁcation of the rites of passage with the ritual procedures in the
nirv®n. a-d¬k◊®.687 The model for the tantric rite is provided by the
vedic sam. sk®ras, although the process is speeded up and condensed
into two days. Although a ‘construction’, initiation is in fact the
elimination of most of the bonds that keep a being bound in the
cycle of birth and death. The Kiran. a-tantra asks a pertinent ques-
tion of ˆiva: if all bonds are removed by initiation, then how can
the body remain? The Lord answers that as a potter’s wheel still
turns even after the making of a pot is completed, so too the body
remains. The seeds of action of many existences (sañcita-karma)
are burned by the mantras at initiation and the acquiring of future
action (®gamin) is also blocked, but that which sustains the body
in the present life (pr®rabhda-karma) has to be exhausted through
experience.69 The exhausting of karma is also a journey through the
levels of the cosmos. The womb of V®g¬˜var¬, which represents all
wombs at the respective levels to be puriﬁed, signiﬁes the myriad
births through which a soul must pass or would otherwise pass were
it not for initiation. The journey along the cord is a journey through
the cosmos and through the body.


               The Ritual Process: Daily Rites

Having undergone the nirv®n. a-d¬k◊®, although in one sense super-
ﬂuous because the disciple is guaranteed liberation, he must never-
theless pursue a rigorous regime of daily rites (nitya karman). These
use up his remaining karma so that at death he will go to liberation
with ˆiva’s grace. Many texts give details of the procedures and
generally follow a pattern of puriﬁcation through various kinds of
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

bath (water, ashes, mantras), the puriﬁcation of the body and its
revitalisation, followed by inner and outer ritual.70 Some texts, such
as the Raurav®gama, do not give full ritual details for they assume
the reader’s knowledge of other sources (although the Raurav®gama
does give details for visualising Sad®˜iva).71 It is important within
the tradition that pollution is a substance that is erased through
action rather than cognition. Yet while this is the general standpoint,
there are passages in Siddh®nta texts that stress cognition within
the buddhi as having liberating force,72 although such statements
do not necessarily contradict the position in that even thought is a
mental action, but generally after initiation it is ritual that destroys
pollution with ˆiva’s grace.
    The Raurav®gama says that there are two kinds of daily ritual,
either performed for oneself (®tm®rthap‚ja) or for the sake of others
                                                              .
(par®rthap‚ja) in public rites before the icon of ˆiva (lin ga) in the
temple.73 In both we see the text mapped on to the body. The general
pattern of daily rites is to purify oneself or one’s body and ritual en-
vironment before going on to worship through visualisation followed
by physical offerings. The Raurav®gama lists puriﬁcation of the self/
body (®tma˜uddhi), puriﬁcation of the place (sth®na˜uddhi), puriﬁca-
tion of ritual implements and substances (dravya˜uddhi), puriﬁcation
              .
of the ˆiva linga, and mantra. One should praise the Lord of the heart
(Sad®˜iva) with the mind ﬁrst, followed by external oblations.74 In the
daily rite described in the Soma˜ambhu-paddhati we have, as in the
Jay®khya-sam. hit®, morning ablutions, evacuation of bodily impurities
(listed in the ˆaiva texts75), bathing rites,76 followed by the sequence
we are now familiar with, of puriﬁcation of the body, creating a
divine body through mantra, mental worship and external worship.
The text gives precise details on puriﬁcation, more detailed than the
Jay®khya, and again closely akin to the vedic smr. ti texts on correct
behaviour.77 There are precise details about ablutions, excretions, and
activities such as cleaning the teeth. We are a long way from any idea
of spontaneous expression and bodily abandon: the Soma˜ambhu, as
with the Jay®khya, presents a picture of establishing a regime for
the strict control of the body and restriction of the senses.
    The preliminary rites in the Soma˜ambhu involve mantra repetition
and empowering the body even before the bh‚ta˜uddhi proper. The
                      The Tantric Body

‘pilgrimage sites’ or ‘crossing points’ (t¬rtha) are established on the
hands, in a process familiar from the Jay®khya. Thus the ancestors
(pitr. ) are established on the index ﬁnger, the deity Praj®pati on the
little ﬁnger, Brahman on the thumb and the other gods at the ends
of the ﬁngers.78 Offerings of puriﬁed water are made to ˆiva, to the
gods, and to the ancestors within one’s family lineage (gotra) from
father to paternal grandfather up to the father of the father of the
paternal grandfather. Offerings are made to the equivalent temporal
distance on one’s mother’s side.79 This in itself is interesting in
showing how the practitioner sees himself within a continuity of
generations and wholly integrated through the daily ritual sequence
into his family, which is in turn a part of the cosmic order. The
narrative of the practitioner’s life, its daily routines and mundane
activity, from the very beginning forms part of the narrative of
his family lineage, which itself is a part of the cosmical hierarchy,
with ˆiva at the top. There is a ﬂow of power through the cosmos,
through one’s ancestors, to oneself.
     The ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati and Soma˜ambhu-paddhati use
the term deha˜uddhi, along with bh‚ta˜uddhi, for the puriﬁcation of
the body and ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva follows the account given by Soma-
˜ambhu. As in the Jay®khya, self-puriﬁcation (®tma˜odhana) occurs
through the puriﬁcation of the elements (bh‚ta˜uddhi), which is the
ﬁrst in a series of puriﬁcations in the ˆaiva system, along with a
puriﬁcation of the place, of ritual material, of mantras and of the
   .
linga, the ‘phallic’ image of ˆiva used in worship. For the bh‚ta˜uddhi,
the Soma˜ambhu prescribes facing north with a self whose passions
are subdued (vin¬t®tman).80 The practitioner – and here we have the
explicit description of new elements entering the process – visualises
two hollow tubes from the big toes of both feet running up the legs
and joining a central channel, which then goes to the crown of the
head. Along this central channel that traverses the body’s vertical axis
are cosmological blockages or ‘knots’ (granthi) at the heart, throat,
palate, between the eyes and in the aperture of the absolute (brahma-
randhra) at the crown of the head, which prevent the soul from rising
to its freedom through the crown of the head to the dv®da˜®nta.
These blockages need to be broken (granthiprabheda) through the
rising power of the self along the body’s subtle channel, a process
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                            

which occurs in the imagination or inner vision in the context of
the initiate’s daily ritual. The soul (j¬va), shining ‘like a star in the
cave of the heart’ (t®rak®k®ram. j¬vam. hr. dayasampuﬂam), travels up
the central channel, imagined in the form of a drop (bindu), to ˆiva
at or outside the crown of the head.81 (There are two dv®da˜®ntas
or ‘end of twelve ﬁngers’. Sometimes this is identiﬁed with the
brahmarandhra, the length of three times four ﬁngers’ width from
the centre of the eyebrows, and sometimes it is twelve ﬁngers above
the brahmarandhra.) Through uttering seed syllables (b¬ja) the self
is dissolved (l¬na) in ˆiva; then one must perform the puriﬁcation
of the subtle body (s‚k◊ma-deha-˜uddhi) by mapping the categories
of the cosmos, or tattvas, on to it and reabsorbing them, each into
its cause in inverse order of their manifestation, up to their origin,
the cosmic substance known as the ‘drop’ or bindu (also known as
mah®m®y®).
    The ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva is in complete concord with this account
in describing the breaking of the ‘knots’ at the heart, throat, palate,
between the eyes, and on the head, and visualizing ˆiva at the
crown of the head, twelve ﬁngers’ length above the point of the
meeting of the eyebrows (dv®da˜®nta).82 The adept should meditate
upon the cutting of the ‘dark and ﬁlthy’ knots, which are pierced
with the exhaling of the breath, to allow energy to ﬂow in the
esoteric channels (n®¥¬).83 He should imagine his soul, identiﬁed
with the mantra HAM      . SA, in the pure lotus of the heart. By the
force of the air (v®yu) in the central channel he should lead the
soul up to ˆiva, located in the dv®da˜®nta at the crown of the head,
seated in the centre of a lotus.84 The adept then meditates upon his
own body as an inverted tree whose roots are in his head, pervaded
by the thirty-six categories that make up the cosmos (tattva), dis-
solved in imagination, each into its cause.85 The sequences in the
Soma˜ambhu and ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva are in some ways more complex
than those in the Jay®khya. Only then does the text begin an ac-
count of the bh‚ta˜uddhi, and we are back on territory familiar from
the Jay®khya. This suggests that an elaboration and complexiﬁca-
tion of the rite has occurred in which a stripped-down version
of the bh‚ta˜uddhi has been embedded in a complex sequence of
visualisation.
                       The Tantric Body

   While the map of the subtle body has become more complex
with the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, with additional ˆaiva cosmological over-
lays, much in the accounts of the bh‚ta˜uddhi in the Soma˜ambhu
and ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva is recognisable from the Jay®khya, and the
general process of the upward movement of the self from bond-
age to liberation remains the same. To illustrate the high degree
of consistency with the Jay®khya let us consider a passage about
the ﬁrst stage in the process of purifying the earth element. The
¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva reads:

  The image of the earth (bh‚man. ¥ala), which is a yellow square, marked
  with the sign of thunder (vajra), whose quality is smell, with the
  Sadya mantra, and the sense-organ of smell, which is associated with
  the limitative energy of cessation (nivr. tti-kal®) and with the divine,
  four-faced one (Brahm®). Through the seed-syllable HL§M. , [the body]
  is then pervaded with the ﬁlling and holding breaths, from the head
  to the soles of the feet. There will be puriﬁcation from repeating it
  [i.e. the seed-syllable] ﬁve times and he should [then] meditate upon
  it as entered into the air [i.e he exhales the earth element into the air
  element].86

As in the Jay®khya, the earth diagram is a golden square marked by
the ‘sign of thunder’ (vajra) and associated with the sense of smell,
but unlike the Jay®khya it is associated with the tattvas, with one
of the ﬁve cosmic regions (kal®) called nivr. tti, and pervades the
entire body, rather than from feet to knees. But this pattern is not
wholly consistent within the ˆaiva Siddh®nta; the V®madeva-paddhati
follows the Jay®khya model with the earth pervading from feet to
knees. The other elements follow the same general pattern, using
the same symbols (the crescent moon for water, a red triangle for
ﬁre marked with svastikas, air as a hexagonal form marked by six
drops (bindu), and space as symbolised by a round crystal). As in the
Jay®khya, the adept burns the body in imagination and then ﬂoods
it with the water arising from his meditation in order to create a
pure, divine body for worship. The text follows the same pattern as
the Soma˜ambhu, on which it heavily relies.
   A general picture therefore emerges of the bh‚ta˜uddhi as a shared
ritual substrate that becomes identiﬁed with particular ˆaiva cosmo-
logies. On the one hand the actual visualisation represented in the
                          ˆaiva Siddh®nta                            

texts has become minimised, from the Jay®khya’s elaborate visions
of each element to Soma˜ambhu and ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva’s rather
formal representation. On the other hand, more elaborate cosmologi-
cal overlays have occurred. Indeed, the system of the bh‚ta˜uddhi
has become identiﬁed with an independent system of the ﬁve ‘knots’
along the central channel of a subtle anatomy, and the ﬁve elements
have become associated with the ﬁve faces of the aspect of ˆiva
called Sad®˜iva.87 We can therefore see strong continuity of ritual
representation, although with later structural elaboration.
    Following the symbolic destruction of the physical, elemental
body in the imagination, the adept then creates a pure body made
of mantras through imposing them in sequence upon himself, the
                                   .
sakal¬karan. a sequence with the anga mantras on the hands, in the way
that we have seen in the Jay®khya. The Soma˜ambhu then describes
a rite purifying the place of ritual (sth®na˜uddhi), although in other
sources this follows the stage of mental worship. But let us take up
the account of mental worship and the construction of the throne
of the deity in the imagination. This throne is virtually identical in
its formation with the lions identiﬁed with the constituents of the
buddhi and so on in the Jay®khya, although there are nevertheless
textual variations.88
    Having established the throne, the practitioner then visualises
the deity (deva) Sad®˜iva upon it. His body is made of ‘knowledge’
(vidy®˜ar¬ra) and is without taint like a pure crystal. He has three eyes
on each of his ﬁve faces (Sadyoj®ta, V®madeva, Aghora, Tat-Puru◊a
and ¡˜®na), each of which is associated with a particular colour,
mantra and cosmic function (creation, maintenance, destruction,
concealment and grace). He has ten arms and holds a lance, a trident
and so on. Furthermore, the vertical axis of the body is identiﬁed
in the practitioner’s imagination with the levels of the cosmos, the
thirty-six tattvas, thus the throne corresponds to all of the tattvas
up to ˆuddha Vidy®, and Sad®˜iva to the tattvas up to ˆakti (see
Appendix).89 As in the JS, external worship follows internal worship
or making offerings to Sad®˜iva in the imagination,90 followed by
the ﬁre ritual, which Soma˜ambhu presents in great detail.91 Other
rites dealt with in the texts are occasional ritual such as festivals and
rites for a desired end.92
                      The Tantric Body

                The Ritual Process: Behaviour

The entextualisation of the body can be seen not only in the speciﬁc,
daily and occasional rites prescribed for the ˆaiva but also in daily
comportment. The tradition is internalised by the initiate adopt-
ing ˆaiva observance, dietary restriction and communal behaviour
(s®m®ny®c®ra). In the section on comportment (caryap®da), the
Mr. gendr®gama tells us that ˆaivas fall into the categories of master
(de˜ika), mantra specialist or s®dhaka, putraka and samayin (see above
p. ), some of whom might follow a speciﬁc observance (vrata) and
some who do not. The term ‘observance’ or ‘vow’ (vrata) indicates
a speciﬁc kind of asceticism in varying degrees of intensity taken
on for varying periods of time, often for a speciﬁc purpose. The
Mr. gendra deﬁnes an observer of vrata as someone who has given up
meat, women and honey (possibly fermented beverage), who sleeps
on the ground and is solitary, carrying a pot for water. He must avoid
young women, garlands and similar things.93 These are standard
prescriptions for the ascetic, and those who follow such asceticism
should indicate their ˆaiva afﬁliation through wearing matted locks
in a chignon or going with shaved head and making the body white
with ashes, although ˜‚dras women, the sick and the lame cannot
wear the matted locks (jaﬂa).94 Those who wear matted locks are
themselves divided into the two groups previously mentioned, the
bhautika, whose observance is limited for a speciﬁc period of time
and the highest or na◊ﬂhiika, namely gurus, putrakas and s®dhakas,
whose observance is throughout life. Some ˆaivas, says the text, are
without observance (avrata), which seems to indicate that they are
householders, although, as Brunner observes, no ˆaiva is completely
without vrata throughout life. Indeed, all ˆaivas must perform ritual
obligations daily at the junctions of the day and at junctures of the
year marked by the moon (parvan), namely rites on the eighth and
fourteenth days of the month, at the solstices and equinoxes.95
     Apart from ritual obligations ˆaivas must follow a mode of
conduct generally in consonance with vedic orthopraxy. The Mr. gendra
presents the requirements of the master in terms that would ﬁnd a
place in the most orthodox of contexts, and the disciple too should
study, listen to the scriptures, abandoning pride, jealousy, hypocrisy
                         ˆaiva Siddh®nta                           

and frivolous activity. He must also behave in speciﬁc, deferential
ways before the master.96 Even the s®dhaka, by deﬁnition interested
in obtaining pleasure and power, should behave in appropriate ways,
not menacing anyone, begging for food, mentally reciting his mantra,
and keeping silence.97 If he sins voluntarily or involuntarily, such as
interacting with a woman, or commits a great sin (mah®p®taka) such
as killing a Brahman, drinking alcohol or having sex with the master’
wife, he must do a penance of reciting eleven mantras ten thousand
times.98 Indeed, the s®dhaka in the Mr. gendra does not appear to be
so different from any ˆaiva ascetic and makes the contrast with the
transgressive ascetics of the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions even more
striking.
   The texts of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta provide us with detailed ex-
amples of the way in which the body is inscribed by the revealed
text, from ritual performance to ethical behaviour and general bodily
comportment. We have in these texts a description of the hierarchi-
cal cosmos presented in various schemes and terminologies which
articulate with sequences of ritual action. Of particular importance
are the puriﬁcation and divinisation of the body, in which we see
the textual representation of the cosmos mapped on to the body and
a cosmological temporality of vast periods of the manifestation and
contraction of the cosmos, enacted in the micro-temporality of daily
ritual time. We have so far shown this structure to be in place in
P®ñcar®tra texts and in the ritual manuals of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta,
traditions which of course maintain distinct identities in terms of
deities and mantras and at a philosophical level wish to distance
themselves from each other. I wish, ﬁnally, to take one last example
from the monistic tantric traditions of Kashmir.
                             

                       Ecstatic Tantra




T      non-Saiddh®ntika traditions, often referred to as ‘Kashmir
      ˆaivism’, assume the ˆaiva Siddh®nta as their theological and
ritual background. While, as we have seen, they draw on the more
extreme anti-vaidika and antinomian revelation of the Tantras of
the right and left currents, the tradition known as the Trika and its
philosophical articulation in the Pratyabhijñ® became established
within the mainstream of medieval Kashmiri society. While prob-
ably always the activity of an elite minority because of the esoteric
complexity and time-consuming nature of the practices involved,
it nevertheless became extremely inﬂuential on the literatures and
practices of all later tantric traditions. The non-Saiddh®ntika tradi-
tions assume the revelation of the ˆaiva Siddh®nta and assume its
cosmological and ritual schemes, adding layers of complexity to
this already complex system and reading the tradition through the
lens of a monistic metaphysics. As a consequence, their account of
cosmology, while often being terminologically identical (especially in
respect of the tattva hierarchy), differs from the ˆaiva Siddh®nta in
being understood as the manifestation of consciousness itself rather
than an unconscious, material substrate (bindu or mah®m®y®). I refer
to this range of traditions, especially the Trika, as ‘ecstatic tantra’
because of the emphasis of its key thinker, Abhinavagupta, on the
spontaneous expansion of consciousness as the ground of being,
                           Ecstatic Tantra                          

the source of revelation, and the source of a liberating, existential
cognition. Abhinavagupta’s tradition is ‘ecstatic’ in its emphasis on
consciousness as a thematic trope and in its belief that individual
consciousness can blissfully transcend itself to realise its true nature
as boundless and objectless.
   The non-Saiddh®ntika material presents us with formidable
problems of interpretation, not least because of the extent and
complexity of the texts and their interrelation. Rather than attempt
an impossible survey or systematic exposition,1 I shall rather develop
the argument about the mapping of experience within the body in
terms of the textual tradition within the non-Saiddh®ntika religions
by demonstrating this in four related areas: ﬁrst, the ﬁlling out of
subjectivity with the absolute subjectivity of pure consciousness,
especially in the works of Abhinavagupta and K◊emar®ja; second,
the mapping of the pantheons of deities on to the body; third, the
locating of centres of power within the body, the systems of cakras;
and, fourth, a concern with sexual experience in the context of
ritual. I shall conﬁne my remarks to speciﬁc texts of the tradition,
namely key texts of Abhinavagupta and K◊emar®ja and an anonymous
hymn, the ‘Hymn to the Circle of Deities Located in the Body’
(dehasthadevat®cakra-stotra).


           Absolute Subjectivity and Indexicality

The ﬁrst-person pronoun that in the nominative case (namely aham)
refers to the subject of predicates, the ‘I’, is used in the non-dualist
tradition of Kashmir to refer to the supreme subject of conscious-
ness, ˆiva or Bhairava himself, inseparable from his energy (˜akti)
and containing within it the totality of manifestation. Abhinavagupta
introduces the notion in his introductory verses to his commentary
on his grand-teacher Utpaladeva’s text, the ¡˜varapratyabhijñ®, where
he says that aham appears at ﬁrst from the complete unmanifest
condition of the absolute.2 In his Tantr®loka Abhinavagupta deﬁnes
this ‘I’ as ‘reﬂexive awareness of the omnipresent in the non-duality
of ˆiva and ˆakti, that is to say the supreme and cosmic emission
within which all is contained’;3 the deﬁnition by Utpala, cited in
                       The Tantric Body

Jayaratha’s commentary, is that the ‘tranquillity in itself of the light
of consciousness is called the condition of the “I”’ (prak®˜asy®tma-
vi˜r®ntir aham. bh®vo hi k¬rtitaΩ).4 This ‘I’ contains within itself the
totality of manifestation, as indicated by the very word aham in so
far as it contains the ﬁrst phoneme of the Sanskrit alphabet a, which
symbolises the initial emergence of creation from the unmanifest
state, and ends with m, regarded as the ‘drop’ or ‘dot’, the bindu
(m. ) to which all creation returns. Abhinavagupta continues in the
Tantr®loka:
   The ﬂowing forth [of the cosmos] whose nature is energy begins with
   the incomparable (a) and ends with ha. Condensing the whole universe,
   it is then reabsorbed in the supreme. This entire universe abides within
   energy and she in the highest absolute. This is truly an enveloping
   by the omnipresent one. In this way, the enveloping of energy [is
   described] in the revelation of the Tr¬˜ik®. The universe shines there
   within consciousness and on account of consciousness. These three
   factors combine and unite in pairs to form the one, supreme form of
   Bhairava, whose nature is the ‘I’.5

   The cosmos emerges from the ‘I’ and returns to it, although this
separation and return can never be outside of that consciousness.
The three elements of the word aham combine to form the totality
of the cosmos. The cosmos is within the absolute subject, as the
word aham contains the ﬁrst and last letters and, by implication, all
between them from a to ha. The three combinations of a and ha, ha
and m, and m and a create a continuous ﬂow of sound, with aham
becoming maha, the former being the expansion of the cosmos, the
latter being its contraction: both expansion from a and contraction
into anusvara, the m. or bindu, are mediated through the energy of
ha.6 The word aham is therefore treated as a mantra; indeed it is
regarded as the force of all other mantras and the power that ani-
mates all living beings.7 According to the commentator Jayaratha, this
aham is unitary consciousness, the supreme beyond everything, the
place where all rests, the light of knowledge, knower, and object of
knowledge. The ‘I’ is ˆiva, who is both father and mother of the uni-
verse, who abides as the universal agent (kart® vi˜vatra sam. sthitaΩ),
and who penetrates the universe as phonic resonance (n®da). Thus
a represents the father and initial movement of the cosmos as the
                           Ecstatic Tantra                           

ﬁrst phoneme, ha is the mother and in her subtle form the Sanskrit
aspirate or visarga represented by two dots (transliterated as Ω), and
this emission and manifestation ﬁnally retrieve the condition of the
incomparable (anuttara) with the anusvara (m. ) or bindu.8
    The passage from the Tantr®loka quoted above refers to a text
of the Trika ˜®stra, the Par®tr¬˜ik®, a series of short verses from
the Rudray®mala, one of the Bhairava Tantras of the southern
current. In his commentary, Abhinavagupta repeats his point about
the absolute subject being the source of all appearance and the
goal of practice, whose ‘highest meaning is uninterrupted continu-
ity’ (avicchinnat®param®rtham) in the cosmos and which is delight
(camatkr. ti).9 This ‘I’ is absolute subjectivity, ‘I-ness’ (ahanta), pure
consciousness (sam. vit, caitanya, cit) without an object, and the
ground of being (®˜raya), containing within it the entire spectrum of
manifest universes. This consciousness is purely reﬂexive (vimar˜a).10
Indeed, it is the true experient and ultimately real subject of ﬁrst-
person predicates beyond the illusory conventionality of the everyday
‘I’, of everyday deixis. Abhinavagupta is aware that this use of the
ﬁrst-person pronoun is far beyond ordinary reference as it implies
the undermining of any subject–object distinction. In that state of
absolute I-ness, he says, there are no distinctions as are indicated
by terms such as ‘this’ (idam), ‘thus’ (evam), ‘here’ (atra) or ‘now’
(id®n¬m);11 that is, purely conventional indexicality has no meaning,
for this ultimate state transcends conventional language. Indeed, the
identiﬁcation of the practitioner, of the ‘indexical-I’ that refers to
‘me’ as a particular, located person, with this absolute ‘I’ revealed in
the texts is the highest goal of the entire, elaborate system.
    What is revealed in the Trika ˜®stra is that the true reference of
the ﬁrst-person pronoun is not the indexical subject of everyday
language, but rather the transcendent subject as the source of all
phenomena. Indeed, to speak of a subject, an ‘I’, in this way is to use
the term such that it does not imply a distinction between subject
and object. While this is a counter-intuitive use of the ﬁrst-person
pronoun, it is nevertheless at the heart of Abhinavagupta’s thinking.
The absolute ‘I’ is yet mediated by a number of levels or realms
within which the identiﬁcation of the self with the implied self of
the texts also occurs. Thus the supreme I is mediated through the
                     The Tantric Body

elaborate cosmology and levels in which there is variable identiﬁ-
cation of the self with its objects of perception. For example, in
the pure course of the pure tattvas each level is characterised by a
different emphasis of the ‘I/it’ (aham/idam) distinction. Sad®˜iva,
the thirty-fourth tattva and the highest level of the cosmos that
is clearly manifested, contains the seeds of subject–object differ-
entiation but nevertheless is dominated by a sense of subjectivity
or I-ness (ahant®) over objectivity (idant®); their differentiation is
as yet indistinct (asphuﬂa) and Sad®˜iva is aware of the identity of
subject and object as characterised by the sentence ‘I am that’ (aham
idam).12 As the cosmos unfolds at lower levels, the subject–object
distinction becomes more pronounced and the greater is the sense
of separation between them.13
   In his commentary on the Par®tr¬˜ik® Abhinavagupta, drawing
on the Saiddh®ntika ontology, declares that everything in the uni-
verse consists in the triad (trikar‚pa) of ‘man’ (nara), ˆakti and
ˆiva. These three modes, ultimately united in consciousness, he
relates to the three goddesses of the Trika – Par®, Par®par® and
Apar® – and to forms of language and address. Thus something
that appears as ‘this’ (idam) when addressed becomes enveloped by
the I-consciousness of the subject (ahambh®va). When addressed
as ‘you’, the other becomes a form of ˆakti, and in this way the
subject assimilates the autonomy of this other ‘I’ into the delight
of his own sense of ‘I’ (aham. bh®vacamatk®ra) and so both become
one in the act of addressing. This is the feature of the Goddess
Par®par®, whose nature is identity in difference.14 In this freedom
of delight the supreme ˆakti, Par®, is operating through the ﬁrst
person. At this point Abhinavagupta introduces a quotation from the
Bhagavad-g¬t® (.) that ‘I’, referring to Kr. ◊n. a, am the highest
self who transcends the perishable and imperishable. Similarly, the
ﬁrst-person verb ‘I am’ indicates a transcendence of the perishable
and imperishable, not the limited ‘I’ but the real ‘I’, which is the
self-luminous ˆiva. In contrast, however, when the autonomy of
the I is subdued by the separateness of the other (‘this one’), then
the Goddess Apar® predominates.15 That is, the triad of goddesses
is present in language transactions and in the processes of ordinary
linguistic identiﬁcation of the agent of speech with the objects of
                           Ecstatic Tantra                           

speech. The reader of Abhinavagupta’s commentary is invited to
expand the sense of ‘I’ and to ﬁll out the empty signiﬁer with the
text- and tradition-speciﬁc content of a transcendent subjectivity.
The aim of the Trika is to open awareness to a sense of a pure
subject, deeper than the triadic relationship of ordinary speech, a
process that occurs not simply through the analysis of linguistic
situations but through ritual and practice. There is the explicit en-
textualisation of the body in daily ritual practice, as we have seen
with the P®ñcar®tra and ˆaiva Siddh®nta, but here with the Trika we
have overlays upon this ritual structure that claims that awareness
needs to expand beyond its boundaries to experience itself as identi-
cal with absolute subjectivity. The indexical-I becomes identiﬁed
with the I of the text, which in this case is understood as limitless,
through an expanding of reference such that the ‘I’ is no longer
bounded or limited by location markers such as ‘here’ or ‘now’. This
expanded sense of I is a further step in the entextualisation of the
body in so far as the body becomes ﬁlled with the awareness that it
is coterminous with the cosmos. As the ‘I’ of ˆiva ﬁlls manifestation,
so the indexical-I ﬁlls the body and breaks its boundaries, becoming
identical with the I of ˆiva. Becoming identical with supreme I-ness
is also to realise that the body is as boundless as the cosmos.
    Of particular note in the non-Saiddh®ntika scheme is the use
of terminology derived from the grammarian school of philosophy,
particularly that of Bhartr. hari. Abhinavagupta’s faithful student
K◊emar®ja tells us that when ˆiva opens his eyes the cosmos is
manifested as an appearance of him, and furthermore this manifesta-
tion is identiﬁed with levels of sound or speech (v®c). The cosmos
is divine speech and the entire circle of powers that comprises the
cosmos can be understood as ˆiva’s voice. This divine speech that
makes up appearance forms a graded hierarchy from the pure to the
impure (as we have seen in the example from the P®ñcar®tra), from
the highest level of ˆiva to the level of the individual experient.
K◊emar®ja expresses this concisely when he writes:
  Now the power of speech (v®k˜akti), who is the Goddess Supreme
  (par®), comprises awareness of complete subjectivity. Her form is the
  eternally enunciated great mantra, without desire due to [being one
  with] the light of consciousness, she is pregnant with the complete
                       The Tantric Body

  circle of powers (˜akticakra) whose form [comprises the letters] from
  a to k◊a. She therefore manifests the levels of [limited] subjectiv-
  ity through the gradual stages of [sound, namely] the ‘the seeing’
  (pa˜yant¬), ‘the middle’ (madhyama) and so on. Not manifesting her
  true nature as the Supreme state, she illuminates mental activity, new
  every moment, and displays to the experient [bound by] illusion, par-
  ticular objects which had not been hitherto manifest. She also reveals
  the perfect (avikalpa) level covered by that [mental activity] although it
  is [really] pure.16

Here we see how the embodied individual experient is the conse-
quence of the contraction of supreme consciousness, and how the
limited sense of I, the indexical-I, is a result of the contraction
of the supreme ‘I’ (p‚rn®ham), the unlimited textual-I or the ‘I of
discourse’ in the text, through the power or goddess of speech.17
The goddess gives birth, as it were, to the cosmos as the circle of
powers, which is envisaged as the letters of the Sanskrit alphabet.18
This unfolding of sound develops as a graded hierarchy, mapped
on to the four levels of language that the Kashmiri non-dualists
take from the grammarian Bhartr. hari, namely pa˜yant¬, madhyam®
and vaikhar¬,19 adding a supreme level (par®) beyond pa˜yant¬.20
Subjectivity appears to be particular and limited due to the action
of ˆakti, but also due to her power she reveals the pure state of
consciousness, which only appears to be covered over by the impurity
of apparently external mental activity.
   This process of the cosmos opening out and closing in is continu-
ous and occurring at each moment, reﬂected in the mantra aham.
There is, as it were, a process of systole and diastole, opening and
contracting. When pure consciousness contracts as ˆakti, the limited
embodied experient results, and when consciousness opens out to
itself again, limitation is eradicated. As K◊emar®ja says, ‘the power
of consciousness (citi), which is contracted to the object of conscious-
ness, (becomes particularised) consciousness, descending from the
level of uncontracted consciousness.’21 Particular consciousness is
the contraction (sam. koca) of ˆiva, of pure I-ness, while appearance
(®bh®sa) is the manifestation of ˆakti, a process which is also de-
scribed as the universe opening out (unmi◊ati) in appearance and con-
tinuation, space and time, subject–object distinction, and as closing in
(nim◊iati) with the turning back of appearances.22 Thus the opening
                           Ecstatic Tantra                             

out or manifestation of the cosmos as a graded hierarchy of levels
from the pure to the impure is a closing in of pure consciousness in
so far as this manifestation conceals pure consciousness. Conversely,
the contraction or closing in of appearance is the opening out of
pure consciousness. To the degree that the universe is manifested,
the pure consciousness or I-ness of ˆiva is concealed, while to the
degree that the universe is contracted, pure consciousness is revealed.
The journey through the cosmos to the goal is a journey through
less particularised forms of perception to the universal conscious-
ness of ˆiva. This is envisaged as a journey through the body and
a journey through different stages of awakening.23 Furthermore the
body provides the map for this journey, both as a representation of
the cosmic hierarchy through which the soul ascends and as the
means or vehicle for experiencing that journey.
   In the last verse of his Pratyabhijñ®hr. daya, K◊emar®ja says that
upon realising absolute subjectivity, the supreme I-ness, one attains
power over the group of deities that animate the body and the
cosmos, the group of deities identiﬁed with the alphabet or circle
of power (˜akticakra). He writes:

  Then due to entry into complete I-ness, whose nature is the energy of
  the great mantra whose essence is the joy of the light of consciousness,
  there is the attaining of Lordship over the circle of the deities of con-
  sciousness, who are innate and produce the creation and destruction of
  everything. All this is ˆiva.24

Upon attaining liberation, understood as the identiﬁcation of the
indexical-I with the absolute subjectivity of revelation, the practi-
tioner attains power over the circle of deities who animate the cosmos
and body and who are themselves manifestations of pure subjectivity.
On attaining liberation, the yogi realises that the indexical-I has
expanded to the absolute I-ness of ˆiva and everything is therefore
an extension of his own body,25 as the universe iteself is an exten-
sion of pure I-ness. The deities of consciousness are the forces or
instrumental causes that bring about the manifestation and destruc-
tion of the cosmos. They allow for experience and the interaction of
self and world, and allow for the destruction of limited experience
in liberation. As the deities of consciousness are expansions of
                       The Tantric Body

pure consciousness itself, so upon the recognition (pratyabhijñ®)
of the identity of self and absolute, the deities of conciousness are
recognised as expansions of one’s own consciousness.


               The Circle of Deities in the Body

The body is animated by deities who are nothing other than
emanations of consciousness itself. In a text that has probably been
wrongly attributed to Abhinavagupta by Pandey and Silburn,26 these
deities are described as goddesses of the sense faculties offering
their objects or spheres of operation to the absolute, ˆiva in union
with ˆakti in the forms of §nandabhairava and §nandabhariv¬. The
‘Hymn to the Circle of Deities Located in the Body’ (dehasthadev
at®cakrastotra)27 describes the deities of the Krama system, one of
the Kaula traditions, which were absorbed within the Trika.28 This
anonymous text presents us with a pantheon of deities lying at the
esoteric heart of Abhinavagupta’s system. What is signiﬁcant about
the text is that it occurs within a liturgical setting, as part of a daily
ritual of visualisation and identiﬁcation of the self with ˆiva. In the
text we have the identiﬁcation of a lotus containing a pantheon of
deities who represent the totality of the cosmos identiﬁed with the
body. The text describes how §nandabhairava and §nandabhairav¬
are located in the calyx of a lotus, identiﬁed with the heart. They
are in sexual union, which symbolises the non-differentiation of
consciousness from the world, and are regarded as the essence of
a person. They are the essence of experience (anubhavas®ra) both
in the sense of ordinary, unawakened experience that oppresses, as
Silburn observes,29 and in the sense of the liberating experience
of recognising the self as consciousness. In this sense, experience
or anubhava refers to the telos, the goal of practice, the awakening
to the recognition of one’s identity with both transcendence and
immanence.
   The text would be recited by the practitioner to identify the
deities of his pantheon with himself. The hymn is thus a text of
visualisation set within a ritual context. The practitioner, says the
text, ‘should visualise the splendour which is the basis of every-
                           Ecstatic Tantra                             

thing, a deep bliss of awakened consciousness, one’s own tranquillity,
without ﬁlth, pure, without taint and all-pervading.’30 There is a
central deity, a Lord of the clan (Kule˜vara), along with his consort
(Kule˜var¬), surrounded by a harem of goddesses, located in the
heart. He is seated upon a throne of jewels, anointed with musk,
sandalwood and nutmeg, with various foods being offered to him
such as milk, sweetmeats and fruit, all entirely constructed within
the mind. Having given the liturgical visualisation, the text presents
the hymn that locates the circle of deities in the heart which are
also identiﬁed with the whole body and with the cosmos. I cite the
entire text here:
  . Om. Homage to Gan. e˜a. Om. holy! I praise Gan. apati whose body is
  the inhaled breath, who is worshipped at the beginning of a hundred
  philosophical systems, who delights in the bestowal of desired wishes.
  . I praise Vaﬂuka, known as the inhaled breath who removes people’s
  pain; his feet are worshipped by the lineage of Perfected Ones, the
  hordes of yogin¬s, and the best heroes. . I always praise the pure,
  true master whose nature is attentiveness. By the power of his thought
  he reveals the universe as a path of ˆiva for his devotees. . I praise
  §nandabhairava, who is made of consciousness, whom the goddesses
  of the senses constantly worship in the lotus of the heart with the
  pleasures of their own sense-objects. . I praise §nandabhairav¬, whose
  nature is awareness, who continually performs the play of creation,
  manifestation and tasting of the universe. . I constantly bow to
  Brahm®n. ¬, whose nature is higher mind, situated on the petal of the
  Lord of gods [i.e. Indra in the east], who worships Bhairava with
  ﬂowers of certainty. . I always praise Mother ˆ®m. bhav¬, whose nature
  is the ego. Seated on the petal of ﬁre [i.e. Agni in the south-east]; she
  performs worship to Bhairava with ﬂowers of pride. . I always praise
  Kum®r¬, situated on the southern petal, whose essence is the mind,
  who gives offerings to Bhairava with ﬂowers of discrimination. . I
  constantly bow down to Vai◊n. av¬, seated on the south-west petal, the
  power of whose nature is that which is heard, who makes offerings to
  Bhairava with ﬂowers of sound. . I honour V®r®h¬, who possesses the
  sense of touch. Seated on the western petal, she satisﬁes Bhairava with
  ﬂowers of touch which captivate the heart. . I praise Indr®n. ¬, whose
  body is sight, whose body is seated on the north-west petal, who wor-
  ships Bhairava with the most beautiful and best of colours. . I bow
  to C®mund®, called the sense of taste, dwelling on the petal of Kubera
  [i.e. north]; she constantly worships Bhairava with offerings of the
  varied six ﬂavours. . I always bow down to Mah®lak◊m¬, known as the
                      The Tantric Body

  sense of smell, who, seated on the petal of the Lord [ˆiva in the north-
  east], praises Bhairava with varied fragrances. . I praise constantly
  the Lord of the body, who gives perfection known as the self, united
  with the thirty-six categories; he is worshipped as the Lord of the six
  systems of philosophy. . In this manner I praise the circle of deities
  innate within the body, an elevated assembly continually present, the
  end of everything, vibrant, and the essence of experience. Thus the
  sacred hymn to the circle of deities in the body is fully completed.31

   These are the eight mothers of the Kaula tradition, sometimes listed
as seven, namely Brahm®n. ¬, ˆ®mbhav¬, Kum®r¬, Vai◊n. av¬, V®r®h¬,
Indr®n. ¬, C®mun. ¥®, and Mah®lak◊m¬. They are also found, with some
variation, in the Pur®n. ic texts, particularly the Dev¬mah®tmya, as
forms of Durg®,32 and in the Agni-pur®n. a, where they are framed
by Tumburu/V¬rabhadra and Vin®yaka.33 In one of the earliest
tantric references they are listed in the Netra-tantra, where they
are the entourage of Kule˜vara.34 The Tantr®loka refers to them in
the context of the secret ritual focused on Kule˜vara and Kule˜var¬,
where each is in sexual union with a form of Bhairava.35 In the
¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati we ﬁnd seven mothers in the context of
the worship of attendant deities to ˆiva, each with her particular
visualised form, colour, mount and so on.36
   In the stotra, quoted above, we see that the body becomes the text
upon which the deities of the tradition – the goddesses of the senses
– are inscribed. The body is inhabited by the circle of deities; this
pantheon animates the body, which becomes the man. ¥ala wherein
they reside. One of the terms for the pantheon of goddesses here
represented is ‘clan’ or kula, a term which itself is rich in meaning,
as we will see, but one of whose meanings according to a scripture
cited by Jayaratha is, indeed, ‘body’.37 These goddesses are identiﬁed
not only with the body but with different levels of the hierarchical
cosmos, thereby creating a homology between body and cosmos.
While there is no narrative dimension to this text, set in a broader
context of its liturgy this sacralisation of the body entails a temporal
and so narrative identiﬁcation of the practitioner with the cosmos,
constructed through text and ritual. We might even say that the story
of the body becomes the story of the cosmos, which is the story of
the unfolding of the essence of experience. The hymn is an excellent
                           Ecstatic Tantra                            

illustration of the entextualisation of the body in a ritual context and
how the metaphysical speculation about pure subjectivity is textually
and ritually (and so somatically) located. The body becomes the text
through the identiﬁcation with the deities revealed in the revelation
and all action is understood as offerings made to the supreme deities
ˆiva and ˆakti, who, as Abhinavagupta and K◊emar®ja tell us, are
both contained within absolute I-ness. The circle of deities in the
body who animate the cosmos are emanations of the self and also
deities who animate the levels of the cosmos as manifestations of
pure consciousness. This idealism is at the heart of the Krama system
absorbed within the Trika. The Krama categories of creation, main-
tenance, destruction, the nameless (an®khya) and splendour (bh®sa)
are implicitly contained in the man. ¥ala, the circle of bliss realised as
the true nature of one’s own experience.38 As the self animates the
limbs of the body, so the Lord animates the universe.39 In the last
verse of the Pratyabhijñ®hr. daya K◊emar®ja explicitly links the deities
of the senses with pure subjectivity in that they are expansions of
it, represented in the expansion of the term aham.40


                   Kun. d. alinı̄ and the Cakras

The term used for the deities within the body in the text just
discussed is ‘wheel’ or ‘circle’ (cakra), which also refers to a lotus
and the heart as a lotus. This sense of cakra as lotus is used more
generally for locations within the body itself. Indeed the cakras
have become part of a common, New Age esotericism in the West,
entering from pan-Hindu use of the six or seven cakras in Yoga to
indicate centres of power within the body and speciﬁcally arranged
along the central axis of the trunk. Within Indian medicine this
central axis became identiﬁed with the spinal column, and there are
curious fusions of Western anatomy with yogic esoteric anatomy.41
While the system of cakras has become synonymous with tantric
esoteric anatomy in popular representation, it is important to re-
member that there are other systems of mapping the cosmos on to
the body, as we have already seen, and that these systems of mapping
are text- and system-speciﬁc; less reiﬁed than modern conceptions
                         The Tantric Body

yet also more text- and tradition-based than some modern exponents
would acknowledge.
    The term cakra as referring to centres of subtle anatomy ﬁrst
occurs in the Tantras, although earlier texts contain cakra-like
references. David White has argued that probably the earliest Hindu
source is the Bh®gavata-pur®n. a where six sites (sth®na) are listed
at the navel (n®bhi), heart (hr. t), breast (uras), root of the palate
(svat®lum‚la), the place between the eyebrows (bhruvorantara), and
the cranium (m‚rdha). He goes on to suggest that the earliest Hindu
source for the application of the term cakra to these centres is the
Kaulajñ®na-nirn. aya.42 In this text there are eight cakras listed, medi-
tation and worship (dhy®nap‚j®) of each in turn bestowing different
magical powers: worship and visualisation of the ﬁrst cakra giving
the power of being one with Yogin¬s and the yogic powers of becom-
ing minute and so on; visualisation of the second cakra giving the
powers of attraction and subjugation, the ability to project oneself
and break objects at a distance; and so on.43
    Yet the earliest text that documents the six cakras, known to later
Kaulism and yoga traditions, is the eleventh-century  Kubjik®mata-
tantra.44 Here, in chapter  and elsewhere, we have the standard
list of the m‚l®dh®ra (anal region), sv®dhisth®na (genital region),
man. ipura (navel), anah®ta (heart), vi◊uddha (throat) and ®jñ® (between
the eyebrows), plus the ‘centre’ beyond the cakras at the crown
(sahasr®ra), although later chapters only present ﬁve cakras, not
linked to Kun. ¥alin¬, as Padoux has observed, but associated with
the ﬁve elements.45 Indeed the humpbacked or crooked Goddess
Kubjik® of this text is identiﬁed with Kun. ¥alin¬.46 This list of six
is unknown to the earlier tradition, where instead we ﬁnd a variety
of terms and text-speciﬁc systems of mapping the cosmos on to the
vertical axis of the body. Sanderson writes:

   In fact it [the system of six cakras] is found in none of the early tradi-
   tions mentioned. Instead we ﬁnd there a great variety in the division of
   the vertical line of the central power (su◊umn. ®). There are six ‘seasons’,
   ﬁve ‘knots’ (granthayaΩ), ﬁve voids (vyom®ni), nine wheels (cakr®ni),
   eleven wheels, twelve knots, at least three sets of sixteen loci (®dh®r®Ω),
   sixteen knots, twenty-eight vital points (marm®ni), etc.47
                           Ecstatic Tantra                           

   By the time of the later Kaulism, especially the ˆr¬ Vidy® associ-
ated with the Goddess Tripurasundar¬, along with medieval Haﬂha
yoga and N®th Siddha texts such as the Siddhasiddh®nta-paddhati
and the famous ◊a¥cakranirupan. am, the term cakra refers to points
or lotuses (padma) with varying numbers of petals, speciﬁc letters of
the alphabet and colours, located along the central axis of the body.48
Indeed the cakras are connected by subtle channels (n®¥¬) along
which power or subtle energy (pr®n. a) ﬂows to animate the body and
which needs to be controlled through yogic and tantric practice. But
an important point is that there is textual variety in these systems,
exhibited not only in the Netra-tantra but in other texts as well. The
Lak◊m¬-tantra, for example, cites three centres for visualisation as well
as thirty-two located along the body’s axis,49 we have seen systems
of subtle anatomy in the JS and ˆaiva Siddh®nta texts, Aghora˜iva
describes visualising the subtle body as an inverted banyan tree,
and the Dehasthadevat®cakra-stotra, discussed above, has the body
as a circle of goddesses. The Saiddh®ntika S®rdhatri˜atik®lottara
devotes a chapter to the circle of channels (n®¥¬cakra), knowledge of
which is necessary to attain supernatural power. The text describes
the principal kind of channel and the secondary channels, totalling
, in total. These channels ﬂow upwards and downwards from
the navel to all parts of the body, along which ﬂow blood and subtle
breath (pr®n. a).50 These breaths are classiﬁed into ten types in the
text, the descending breath (ap®na) responsible for digestion and
excretions, the ud®na responsible for movement of the eyes, and
so on.51 While there are textual variations, and though the subtle
anatomy of visualisation is sometimes conﬂated with physiological
processes, there is a general shared structure of locating a column
of power along the body’s axis. This structure, however, has some
variability in our texts and always occurs within the context of ritual
and visualisation. While there are ancient precedents for the idea of
a subtle anatomy in the Upani◊ads, especially a focus on the heart,52
the system of six cakras and three principal n®¥¬s that pervades
medieval and later Hinduism is post-eleventh century.
   Let us describe one of these early systems. Probably before the
Kubjik®mata-tantra, perhaps before the tenth century, the Netra-
tantra lists six cakras without the sv®dhisth®na or sahasr®ra, as Padoux
                       The Tantric Body

has observed,53 but rather with a cakra of the palate (t®lu) along with
the dv®da˜®nta, the point either twelve ﬁngers from the brow centre
or twelve above the crown of the head. The Netra-tantra presents
these six in describing the subtle visualisation of the form of ˆiva,
Mr. tyunjit, and then connects them to six centres (adhara) and twelve
‘knots’ (granthi) and six spaces (vyoma) located along the central
axis. Although the text does not mention Kun. ¥alin¬, it does say that
the yogi should visualise ˆakti in the central breath (ud®na) that is
manifested between inhalation (pr®n. a) and exhalation (ap®n. a). This
is similar to the Vijñ®nabhairava-tantra, which refers to the upward
movement of pr®n. a within the body without mentioning the term
kun. ¥alin¬. In other places kun. ¥alin¬ is explicitly linked to pr®n. a.54
The practitioner ﬁlls this power with his own virile energy (v¬rya)
through identifying the ˆakti with mantra. She then arises from the
organ of generation (janm®dh®ra or ®nandendriya) up through the
central channel that pervades the body, through the navel (n®bhi),
heart (hr. t), throat (kr. ﬂtha), palate (t®lu) and the centre between the
eyebrows (bhr‚madya), piercing the twelve knots and voids to the
crown of the head where ˆiva in the form of Mr. tyunjit is located.
She descends from there to the heart, where the body is ﬁlled with
the elixir of longevity (amr. ta or ras®yan. a) that ﬂows through the
innumerable channels bestowing agelessness and immortality.55 The
basic structure of the rising of energy in the body that we ﬁnd
in later tradition is here, although the details of alignments and
terminology are text-speciﬁc.56
    The rising of energy in the body that we see in the Netra-tantra
is also found in the Kubjik®mata-tantra where a serpentine energy
is associated with mantra and levels of speech. In many texts this
energy is named Kun. ¥alin¬, the coiled one, although the ‘crooked
goddess’ Kubjik® is earlier and perhaps a precursor. She sleeps in
the lowest cakra; once awakened through yogic practice, especially
breath control through the two channels from the nostrils that meet
the central channel in the m‚l®dh®ra, she rises the central channel
to ˆiva at the crown. According to White, the earliest occurrence
of ‘this indwelling female serpent’ is the Tantrasadbh®va-tantra,
possibly dated as early as the eighth century , where this in-
dwelling power is described as kun. ¥al¬, she who is ‘ring shaped’.57
                           Ecstatic Tantra                          

K◊emar®ja cites this text, which would appear to be a visualisation
in which Kun. ¥alin¬ is unconscious and appears as if poisoned. Once
awakened she rises up and so transforms the poison of ignorance
into a force of liberation.58 Abhinavagupta identiﬁes different levels
of Kun. ¥alin¬ and stresses her cosmological dimension, expanding
from bindu, the source of manifestation, and shining in all things
in the form of energy (˜aktikun. ¥alk®) and in the form of breath
(pr®n. akun. ¥alik®), then up to the extreme point of emission where she
is the supreme Kun. ¥alin¬.59 For Abhinavagupta there are two main
forms: an ‘upward’ Kun. ¥alin¬ (urdhva) associated with expansion,
and a ‘downward’ Kun. ¥alin¬ (adha) linked with contraction; she is
the systole and diastole of cosmic expansion and contraction. In
his commentary on the Par®tr¬˜ik®, Abhinavagupta links Kun. ¥alin¬
with the kaulik¬ ˜akti, a name for the supreme or highest form of
energy, from whom the Lord is inseparable. The Par®tr¬˜ikh® identi-
ﬁes kaulik¬ ˜akti with the supreme power of the Lord called the
kulan®yik®, the Lord of the clan, who resides in the heart. In his
commentary Abhinavagupta identiﬁes this goddess with the power
that brings into manifestation the body, breath, and experiences
of pleasure and pain (˜ar¬ra–pr®n. a–sukh®deΩ), and the energy of
the whole circle of deities within the body (Brahm¬ and the others
discussed above). This is also the power within the body and the
power of sexuality as the source of reproduction. He furthermore
links Kun. ¥alin¬ to the force of the syllable ha in the mantra and
the concept of aham, the supreme subjectivity as the source of all,
with a as the initial movement of consciousness and m its ﬁnal
withdrawal.60 Thus we have an elaborate series of associations, all
conveying the central conception of the cosmos as a manifestation
of consciousness, of pure subjectivity, with Kun. ¥alin¬ understood
as the force inseparable from consciousness, who animates creation
and who, in her particularised form in the body, causes liberation
through her upward, illusion-shattering movement.
    What is signiﬁcant about the descriptions of the central channel
within the body and the power that moves along it are the mercu-
rial nature of the accounts. The texts do not intend to reify the
subtle body and its centres; although admittedly Abhinavagupta uses
Kun. ¥alin¬ as an explanation, generally in the texts the bodily centres
                       The Tantric Body

and the upward movement of energy are intended for visualisation
purposes. This is stated in the Netra-tantra, where the text presents a
list of the centres in the context of the visualisation of Mr. tyunjit, and
ˆiva explicitly declares that he will speak about the supreme, subtle
visualisation (dhy®na).61 This is an important point. The centres of
the subtle body are given meaning and form a part of the practice
only in the context of ritual and meditative visualisation grounded
in text. The Kun. ¥alin¬ image is complex and claiming that it must
be understood within the tradition and within speciﬁc forms of
practice that intend to eventuate in the ‘experience’ of Kun. ¥alin¬ is
not to disclaim or reduce these practices, although it is to be suspi-
cious of the claim that Kun. ¥alin¬ is universal and found in different
cultural locations. Abhinavagupta would have regarded the raising
of Kun. ¥alin¬ as an experience, as indicated by his claim that if this
rising force should descend, then possession by demons (pi˜®c®ve˜a)
would ensue,62 but such experience can only be understood in the
context of the texts and traditions of its occurrence. The body is con-
strained by text and tradition. Visualising the body as being mapped
with these subtle centres is clearly an entextualisation of the body, a
mapping of the cosmos and journey of the self to its transcendent
source in ways speciﬁed within the tradition. Indeed, to seek to
understand the cakras outside of this context as if they are intended
as extra-textual, ontological structures is incoherent. The rising of
˜akti within the body, the piercing of the centres along a central axis,
and the accompanying mantras are part of the practitioner’s aligning
of himself with tradition and part of the construction of his body in
tradition-speciﬁc ways to attain the tradition-speciﬁc goal.
    Finally we must examine the same processes of entextualisation
at work in what has sometimes become synonymous with Tantra,
its sexualised ritual.


                        Two Ritual Systems

An important difference between the Trika and ˆaiva Siddh®nta is
that for the Trika the ritual sequence of daily rites, the entextualisa-
tion of the body, is not understood as a manipulation of material
                           Ecstatic Tantra                           

substance but as action within consciousness. Ritual actions must be
understood in terms of cognition and knowledge for the Kashmiri
non-dualists, for liberation is the recognition of the subject’s identity
with absolute consciousness. Given this understanding, the monistic
commentators on ˆaiva ritual texts had to interpret ritual in term of
consciousness and stages of awareness. Apart from the three methods
(up®ya) and sudden awakening in the non-means (anup®ya),63 there
were two principal forms of rites for the initiate into the Trika
tradition: the normative rite of the Trika initiate called the tantra-
prakriy®, lucidly described by Sanderson,64 and the esoteric rite called
the kula-prakriy® for the tantric virtuosi, which involved ritualised
sex outside of orthodox, vedic bounds.65 The normative rite fol-
lowed the basic pattern we have outlined in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta of
puriﬁcation of the body, the divinisation of the body through ny®sa,
mental worship and external worship, although with the transgressive
addition of the consumption of meat and wine.
   I refer the reader to Sanderson’s article, which describes how
the initiate installs the mantras of the Trika deities into two wine-
ﬁlled cups, makes offerings to the guardian deities surrounding the
place of worship, performs the puriﬁcation of the body in the way
previously described, although he understands it as the destruction
of his public and physical individuality (deh®ntata), leaving him
with the awareness that his identity is ‘pure undifferentiated con-
sciousness as the impersonal ground of his cognition and action’.66
Following his divinisation through ny®sa, the initiate visualises a
trident man. ¥ala (tri˜‚l®bjaman. ¥ala) along the axis of the body, with
the three goddesses of the Trika – Par®, Par®par® and Apar® – located
at its prongs above the crown of the head. The trident is identiﬁed
with the tattva hierarchy, and Sanderson shows how Abhinavagupta
overcodes the rite with terminology and deities derived from other
tantric systems, notably the Krama and Kula. The initiate identi-
ﬁes himself with the Goddess Par® located on the central prong
and ascends up the trident, through his own body and so through
the cosmos, to merge with the transcendent source of the three
goddesses, the absolute K®lasam. kar◊in. ¬, the fourth power behind
them, of which they are emanations. K®lasam. kar◊in. ¬ herself is not
visualised in the sequence as she is the ground of consciousness
                     The Tantric Body

behind all appearance and beyond representation. In the ritual se-
quence the initiate transcends the usual identiﬁcation of the ‘I’ with
the subject of ﬁrst-person predicates, the indexical-I, to construct
in his visualisation an expanded sense of ‘I’ coterminous with the
ground of appearance and the goal of practice, an idea, as we have
seen above, that Abhinavagupta develops in his commentary on the
Par®tr¬˜ik®.
   This normative ritual is assumed by the more esoteric rite for
high initiates only, the kula prakriy®, the secret rite that involves
the ritual consumption of meat, alcohol and ﬁsh along with the
practice of taboo-breaking sex in a ritual setting. The ritual use of
sex, an exceedingly difﬁcult observance (asidh®r®vrata), is mainly the
preserve of the non-Saiddh®ntika traditions, although it is not wholly
unknown within the Siddh®nta.67 Chapter  of Abhinavagupta’s
Tantraloka is probably the clearest description of the rite. It has
now become the object of scholarly attention, as has the inquiry into
tantric sex. White has written a deﬁnitive work on ‘tantric sex’ and
put paid to the connection between Western ‘tantric sex’ and the
ancient traditions of India. I do not intend to attempt to reproduce
his very thorough and engaging work but will simply illustrate how
sexualised ritual is indeed another example of the entextualisation
of the body. But it is necessary to outline White’s argument very
brieﬂy. Put simply, White argues that originally ‘tantric sex’ was
‘nothing more or less than a means to producing the ﬂuids that
Tantric goddesses ... fed upon’.68 In the quest for power, generally
male practitioners courted generally female supernatural beings, such
as the Yogin¬s, who needed to be appeased (and controlled) through
taboo-breaking offerings of meat, alcohol and sexual ﬂuids. Texts in
these traditions continued to be composed into fairly modern times;
the sixteenth- or seventeenth-century Yoni-tantra describes such a
ritual. The practitioner (s®dhaka) needs to procure a woman who is
wanton (pram®da), free from shame, whom he worships in the centre
of a man. ¥ala, offering her cannabis (vijaya)69 before performing the
sexualised rite (preferably during menses) to produce the yoni-tattva,
the ﬂuids necessary to offer to the Goddess.70 Indeed, the basic
structure of Hindu ritual worship (p‚j®) of making an offering to
a deity and receiving a blessing, usually in the form of the food
                            Ecstatic Tantra                            

that had been offered, consumed as ‘grace’ (pras®da), is followed in
tantric rites. But instead of offered rice or fruit, it is meat, alcohol,
and above all sexual ﬂuids produced in a ritual context, which, in
the Veda-aligned, later tantric tradition of the ˆr¬ Vidy®, may be
replaced by substitutes (pratinidhi). This sexualised ritual (White’s
phrase) serves to satisfy the ferocious and dangerous deities of the
tantric pantheons and to allow the practitioner to gain control over
them, power being the main concern of these practitioners, especially
the power of immortality.71
   Such acts of ritual appeasement, the offering and consumption
of mixed sexual ﬂuids to ferocious goddesses, is at the origin of the
‘hard’ tantric traditions, the more extreme cults of what Sanderson
designates the ‘left’.72 Indeed, the Trika in its origins is such a
tradition, whose foundation lies in the Kaula religion of cremation-
ground asceticism, which worshipped a pantheon of goddesses of
the clan or family (kula) surrounding a lord and/or his goddess
(Kule˜vara and Kule˜var¬), as, for example, the deities of the senses
surrounding §nandabhairava and §nandabhairav¬ described above.
The Trika added to this the worship of the three goddesses Par®,
Par®par® and Apar® in a triangle, within which is the Lord of the
Kula. Sanderson writes:

   The worship could be carried out externally, on a red cloth upon the
   ground, in a circle ﬁlled with vermilion powder and enclosed with a
   black border, on a coconut substituted for a human skull, a vessel ﬁlled
   with wine or other alcohol, or on a man. ¥ala,. It may also be offered
   on the exposed genitals of the d‚t¬ [female practitioner], on one’s own
   body, or in the act of sexual intercourse with the d‚t¬. Later tradition
   emphasises the possibility of worshipping the deities in the vital energy
   (pr®n. a) – one visualises their gratiﬁcation by the ‘nectar’ of one’s
   ingoing breath. We are told that the seeker of liberation may carry out
   this worship in thought alone (s®m. vid¬ p‚j®). However, even one who
   does this must offer erotic worship with his d‚t¬ on certain special days
   of the year (parvas).73

This erotic worship was a requirement for those initiated into the
Kaula dimension of the Trika tradition, regarded by Abhinavagupta
as its esoteric heart, the quintessentially tantric system which re-
garded vedic injunctions and worship restricted by caste as founded
                       The Tantric Body

on a restrictive prohibition that prevented the realisation of the
spontaneous expansion of consciousness.74 The feminine is given
precedence, and women are to be worshipped and their homes
treated as thrones of deities (p¬ﬂha).75 Here ecstasy takes precedence
over dharma.
    While this rhetoric might seem to go against tradition and estab-
lished authority, it only goes against a particular kind of tradition and
in so doing aims at establishing the superiority of its own revelation.
The tantric traditions – including the extreme ones – set themselves
against what they perceive to be the restrictive and lower revelation
of the Veda (see pp. –). The erotic worship of the pantheon,
while being clearly at variance with vedic injunction and purity
rules, is nevertheless within a tradition of practice based on a body
of texts. The earliest layers of the traditions of the left emphasised
the appeasing and control of ferocious deities through the offering
and consumption of sexual ﬂuids from around the seventh century
, but these traditions widened their appeal through time, becoming
adapted to householder ways of life. By the time of Abhinavagupta
we have the traditions being reinterpreted and a shift of emphasis
from the production of sexual ﬂuids in ritual intercourse to sexual
experience being an analogue of the bliss of the experience of pure
consciousness. The production of sexual ﬂuids for ritual purpose is
still important, but, as Sanderson observes, the stress comes to be
on sexual experience itself as a method of realising the expansion
of consciousness. Sexual experience between the male practitioner
and his female partner becomes a reﬂection of the joy of ˆiva and
ˆakti. The rite becomes aetheticised.76
    It is in this context that Abhinavagupta composes his chapter on
the kula prakriy®. The chapter and Jayaratha’s commentary show
that this was a well winnowed tradition by the tenth and eleventh
centuries, with a history of textual transmission and teachings
handed down through lineages of masters. While the kula rite in the
Tantr®loka undoubtedly reﬂects the earlier tradition of consuming
sexual ﬂuids – and this would seem to be a part of the rite – there
is also an emphasis on an aesthetic dimension and the realisation
of the bliss of the consciousness of ˆiva and ˆakti in union. In his
commentary on the Par®tr¬˜ik®-tantra, Abhinavagupta writes:
                            Ecstatic Tantra                              

  In the case of both sexes sustained by the buoyancy of their seminal
  energy, the inwardly felt joy of orgasm (antaΩspar˜a-sukham) in the
  central channel induced by the excitement of the seminal energy intent
  on oozing out at the moment of thrill is a matter of personal experi-
  ence to everyone. This joy is not simply dependent on the body which
  is merely a fabricated thing. If at such a moment it serves as a teaching
  of remembrance of the inherent delight of the divine self, one’s con-
  sciousness gets entry in to the eternal, unalterable state that is realised
  by means of the harmonious union with the expansive energy of the
  perfect I-consciousness which constitutes the venerable supreme divine
  ˆakti who is an expression of the absolutely free manifestation of the
  bliss of the union of ˆiva and ˆakti denoting the supreme Brahman.77

    Sexual experience, speciﬁcally orgasm (kampak®la), can reﬂect
the divine union of ˆiva and ˆakti. Ordinarily sexual experience
does not, and sexuality only becomes a transpersonal joy once it is
a ‘teaching of remembrance’ (abhijñ®nopade˜a); that is, the remem-
brance of tradition. Sexual experience can become an embodiment
of the memory of tradition78 if performed in awareness of the truth
of revelation. This is true of other emotional experience according to
Abhinavagupta, such as the joy of seeing one’s wife and son or the
delight when two pairs of eyes meet or on hearing a sweet song, all
of which stir up energy (v¬rya)79 and have the potential to awaken
awareness and stir the memory of the supreme I-consciousness. In
such experiences the indexical-I can potentially realise its identity
with supreme I-ness mediated through the revelation of tradition.
Only through the text and tradition can such experience be evoked
and such an expansion of the indexical-I take place.
    Establishing a connection between human sexual experience
and trans-human cosmic forces is not unique to Tantra; it had
precedents much earlier in the Indian traditions. Perhaps the most
famous example is from the Br. had®ran. yaka Upani◊ad, where human
sexual experience is akin to a person realising the self: ‘As a man
embraced by a woman he loves is oblivious to everything within
or without, so this person embraced by the self (®tman) consisting
of knowledge is oblivious to everything within or without.’80 The
same is true of the Ch®ndogya Upani◊ad, where the vedic recitation
is identiﬁed with the sexual act.81 So the Trika claim is not unusual
in the Indian context, although the emphasis on the liturgical use
                      The Tantric Body

of sexual ﬂuids is unique to the ‘hard core’ tantric traditions, as
White has shown. What I would wish to emphasise is that there
is a tradition of understanding human experience in a way that
links it to trans-human powers and forces in the cosmos, and that
such links are always mediated through the texts. Indeed, the female
practitioner in the rite conveys the power of the deity, the power of
pure consciousness, to the male practitioner in a process that paral-
lels the consumption of blessed food (pras®da) that was previously
offered to the deity (she also thereby reﬂects temple women of the
later medieval period).82 Human sexuality reﬂects cosmic process
because revelation tells us so; the I-consciousness of ˆiva can be
realised in sexual encounter because the text and tradition tell us
that it is so and not because of any properties of an unmediated
experience (whatever that could be).
    While the expansion of pure consciousness, the ﬁlling out of
the indexical-I with the I-ness of ˆiva, can be realised in ordinary,
everyday transactions, it can also be evoked through ritual. The kula
prakriy® sets up a situation in which the intention is the identiﬁca-
tion of the practitioner and his partner with ˆiva and ˆakti and
the resulting sexual experience with the joy of their union. This
identiﬁcation can be seen in terms of the remembrance of tradition,
always mediated through sacred text or revelation and through the
teacher. To undergo the kula prakriy® means that the couple need
to have the requisite qualiﬁcation (adhik®ra),83 which means having
undergone an initiation into the practice but also having certain
personal qualities and high levels of receptivity, such as the display-
ing of signs of possession (trembling, loss of consciousness) during
initiation. While I have shown in more detail elsewhere how the kula
prakriy® enacts the memory of tradition (where I have also discussed
the gender implications of the rite),84 for our purposes we need to
describe brieﬂy the ritual process in order to see its relevance for
the entextualisation of the body.
    The kula rite entails the male practitioner (s®dhaka) performing
preliminary puriﬁcations that include the visualisation of the rise of
Kun. ¥alin¬. Once the female partner, called the ‘messenger’ or d‚t¬,
joins him they both perform ny®sa, thereby divinising their bodies,
before the practice of the ‘three ms’ (mak®ratraya), namely consump-
                           Ecstatic Tantra                          

tion of wine (madya), meat (m®m. sa) and sexual ﬂuids resulting from
their union (maithuna). According to Jayaratha, sexual substances are
actually passed from mouth to mouth in the rite (a practice which,
observes Silburn, reﬂects Kashmiri marriage custom of passing food
from mouth to mouth85). These three were to become transformed
into the famous ‘ﬁve ms’ (pañcamak®ra) or substances (pañcatattva) of
later ˆ®kta Tantrism, with the addition of ﬁsh (matsya) and parched
grain (mudr®), which in the ˆr¬ Vidy® Brahmanical response to the
earlier tradition were substituted with ‘pure’ substances (pratinidhi).86
Abhinavagupta even redeﬁnes ‘celibacy’ or brahmacarya as the ritual
use of these three substances, forbidden to orthodox Brahmans, while
he still accepts the legitimacy of the celibate renouncer whose semen
is upturned (‚rdhvaretas).87 The hero (v¬ra) or perfected one (siddha)
who follows the esoteric path (kulavartman) must nevertheless per-
form the rite with complete detachment and without desire, consum-
ing the probhibited substances as integral to the ritual process, for
otherwise the hero would simply remain as a beast (pa˜u). Indeed,
later ˆ®kta Tantrism evokes a distinction between three dispositions
(bh®va): the beast (pa˜u), who does not perform worship with the
ﬁve ms; the hero (v¬ra), who does; and the divine (divya), who has
realised the goal,88 although these are not found in ˆaiva texts. The
bodies of the participants in the kula rite are mapped by the textual
tradition. For Abhinavagupta and Jayaratha the Siddha and D‚t¬
have themselves developed to a high level of attainment within the
tradition; they have already shaped their lives in accordance with
the prescriptions of the tradition, and they reﬂect ˆiva and ˆakti in
the ritual process. The aim of the rite is perfection in a condensed
time period, which, in the rhetoric of the tradition, would otherwise
take countless years with ﬂoods of mantras;89 the kula practice is a
quick path to liberation.
   From these examples from non-Saiddh®ntika traditions we can see
that the same processes are at work as in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta and
P®ñcar®tra tantric traditions. The body is structured in accordance
with text, and tradition becomes a map of the self by which the
practitioner navigates towards the goal. In the case of the Trika
this is particularly marked in the recognition of the identity-limited
self with the transcendent subjectivity of ˆiva, in the hierarchical
                    The Tantric Body

structure of the body in alignment with the cosmos, in the various
pantheons of deities located within the body, and in the sexualised
ritual at the Trika’s heart.
                               

               The Tantric Imagination




S     , we have seen that there is a variety of tantric tradi-
     tions, practices, terminologies and metaphysics, and that while
practices are unique to speciﬁc texts there are shared processes and
structures ﬁlled out with different content across traditions. I have
characterised this as the body as text or its entextualisation. The
body is central to the tantric imaginaire,1 serving as the focus for the
self-enactment of tradition through ritual and asceticism and serving
as the focus for the self-declaration of tradition in tantric theology.
Indeed, if anything is common to tantric traditions it is the divinisa-
tion of the body through the processes we have described: mantra,
the bh‚ta˜uddhi, ny®sa and so on. The body is the central organis-
ing topos or metaphor of the traditions, which structures ideas of
power, vision and levels of awakening in our texts. Furthermore, the
body entails a corporeal understanding that functions not only as a
conceptual scheme but as a lived experience; an experience always
within the boundaries of tradition. Through paying close attention
to textual detail of the body’s representation in ritual and theology,
we have seen how the body is encoded in text-speciﬁc ways. We can
now make some more general remarks about shared processes. Of
particular importance is how deixis or metalepsis functions within
the texts: that is, how the practitioner becomes identiﬁed with the
text, how he transgresses the boundaries of the everyday self or
                      The Tantric Body

everyday indexicality to align himself with the implied ‘reader’
within the texts. In the technical jargon, the indexical-I becomes
identiﬁed with the ‘I’ of discourse, the ‘I’ of the text. This is also
to say that the text becomes the body, becomes entextualised. We
have seen this especially in the ritual procedures of vision, gesture
and the use of icons.


                               Vision

There is an inseparable link between body and vision in the tantric
traditions. The body, as we have seen, is envisaged and constructed
as divine in the ritual imagination. This construction is a corpo-
real understanding of text and tradition that is enacted not simply
through reading the texts but through enacting the texts in ritual
procedures that entail a high degree of visual imagination. Indeed,
the visionary is of crucial importance in the tantric traditions;
there is no connotation of the ‘imagined’ as unreal. The visions
constructed in inner awareness in conformity to the texts, the ‘im-
aginative’ construction of the body through visualisation, are not
less real for the tantric practitioner than ordinary sense perception;
they are more real. The visualisation of deities and the body are
not categorised as the mere imagination of the wandering mind
based on personal memory that is distracting from the goal of
higher awareness, but are the construction of a world that, while
being removed from the material realm of everyday transaction,
is closer to the source of creation, and so the quality of reality is
intensiﬁed. The world of everyday transaction for monistic ˆaivas
(the world wherein the indexical-I operates) is ultimately unreal,
although it is real for the ˆaiva Siddh®ntin, where ‘real’ means
ontologically distinct. The power of visualisation is the realisation
of a higher level or deeper world of experience, an intensiﬁcation
of aesthetic experience, and an intensiﬁcation of the truth of the
body; that it is truly divine, and as such can approach and serve the
Lord and his or her forms. Visualisation is realisation. Meditation
or visualisation is a technique of experiencing a higher reality for
the practitioner beyond the imaginatively restricted world of sense
                     The Tantric Imagination                       

experience determined by past actions and ignorance. Through a
tradition-constrained imagination, a new world of clarity, light and
joy is opened to the practitioner.
    One way of speaking about visualisation is that it is a representa-
tion of the body within the text, enacted in the inner vision of the
practitioner. The representation of the body, the visionary body
of tantric ritual imagination, occurs within the texts (as we have
seen), within practice, and as objects in the form of icons of deities,
paintings, and diagrams used in ritual. There are two aspects to
tantric representation and vision. The ﬁrst is that there is a strong
connection between visionary representation and the symbolic order;
the symbolic order of the system, text or tradition is envisaged in
visionary terms (as in the visualisation of N®r®yan. a in the heart,
supported by a throne whose legs are made up of different aspects of
the cosmical hierarchy and the sacred revelation of the Vedas – see
pp. –). Second, the lived body, the body of experience, and the
visionary representation of the symbolic order are interpenetrated.
The lived body experiences the symbolic order as a more intensiﬁed
level of imagination than the world of everyday transaction bereft
of imagination, where the common denominator is merely cultural
functionality. The tantric practitioner constructs the world she or he
inhabits from the texts, which provide, as it were, the architecture
of the building of the imagination he, or indeed she, inhabits. This
building is the palace of the deity with whom the practitioner is
ritually identiﬁed at particular ritual junctures of the day, even in
traditions that are metaphysically dualist. The tantric practitioner
lives within the man. ¥ala, lives within the yantra, lives within the
vision of divinity such that the symbolic world of the text becomes
the lived world of the body. Representation in text, icon and rite
coalesce in the experience of the lived body. The world of the prac-
titioner becomes a ritually constrained world or, to use Hanks’s
term, ‘frame space’,2 which contains limited options within which
the practitioner can operate. This construction of what is seen to
be a more real ediﬁce around the practitioner is both the mapping
of life’s journey from bondage in the cycle of transmigration to
power and freedom, and the entextualisation of the body within a
text-dependent symbolic order or representation. The practitioner
                       The Tantric Body

lives within the frame space of the ritual ediﬁce or within the ritual
canopy (vit®naka) constructed in his visionary imagination.
   Vision is therefore suffused with power (˜akti) in these imagina-
tive constructions, which are also realisations. The verb smr. , ‘to
remember’, is often used for visualisation, a term that has wider
connotation than ‘memory’ and might be better understood as recol-
lection or bringing to mind and evoking the forms of tradition (see
below p. ). The t®ntrika lives within ‘memory’ understood in this
way as an ediﬁce of a ritual–visual symbolic order that his body is
within and that is also within his body. The lived body reﬂects the
level of representation and symbolic order, or, to put it less passively,
acts out and performs that symbolic order. Indeed, the acting out
of the particular symbolic order or visionary representation, which
is the deiﬁcation of the self and entextualisation of the body, is a
deﬁning feature of tantric culture. The imaginative mental actions
of ritual, accompanied by ritual utterances, have illocutionary force.
The utterance of the mantra is the making present of the deity; the
inhabiting of the visionary universe is making it present as a stronger
reality than that of the merely everyday or of the frame space of
those who inhabit a lower revelation.
   The Tantras and tantric theologians are therefore opposed to the
views of the materialist tradition (carvaka, lok®yata) on the grounds
that materialism is in fact moving away from the truth of higher
worlds, and to strip imaginative vision away from any account of real-
ity is to strip away the very foundational nature of the world. Without
imaginative vision the world is nothing and almost unconscious. In
ˆaiva Siddh®nta theology, without ˆiva’s enlivening gaze the cosmos is
indeed unconscious (ja¥a); the practitioner recapitulates this creative
vision in his own practice, especially in animating complex visualisa-
tions (dhy®na) within the ritual and meditative process.


                     Gesture and Utterance

Inseparably associated with visualisation are the two practices of
ritual hand gestures or mudr®s and the utterance of mantra. There
is a variety of mudr®s that accompany ritual, described in various
texts including foundational ritual texts such as the Mr. gendr®gama.3
                     The Tantric Imagination                         

The term mudr®, ‘seal’, is rich, with levels of meaning that exceed
the primary reference to gesture. Its principal designation is to
hand gestures that accompany ritual action; hence it might be seen
as the gestural equivalent of mantra. Mudr® is the gestural form
of the deity. Yet the term can refer not only to ritual gestures that
‘seal’ and protect the body but to practices that seal power within
it in the form of semen: the practice of the vajroli mudr® in which
mixed sexual ﬂuids are retracted into the penis for the purpose of
gaining power,4 and the khecar¬-mudr® of haﬂha yoga, the practice
of turning the tongue back above the palate in order to drink the
nectar of immortality dripping from the thousand petalled lotus at
the crown.5 The term mudr® is even used for levels of the cosmos,
perhaps in the sense that one level is sealed off from the next. André
Padoux has outlined the meanings and contexts of the term’s occur-
rence, especially with reference to the V®make˜var¬mata-tantra and
to Abhinavagupta.6 Mudr®, explains Abhinavagupta, is of four sorts,
done with body, hands, speech or mind and he gives an etymology
(nirukta) of the word: that it ‘is so called in the ˜®stras because it is
that which gives, that which bestows, upon the self, through the body
(dehadv®rena), a bliss which is the attainment of one’s real nature’.7
Mudr® is not simply a ritual gesture but a reﬂection (pratibimba) of
a deity and energy (˜akti) that liberates beings from all conditions
of existence. The Yogin¬hr. daya gives ten kinds of mudr® as hand
gestures which are aspects of the deity Tripurasundar¬, and indeed
only discusses their cosmic signiﬁcance as ten aspects of her energy
of action. Padoux observes that the procedure of the mudr®s takes
place on several levels, the divine–cosmic, the corporeal–mental and
the ritual, and ‘brings into play, through thought and bodily action,
a cosmic, mental and corporeal totality’.8
    Mantra is connected to mudr® in that as mudr® is the expression of
the deity in the body through gesture, so mantra is the sonic form of
the god. It is not within the scope of this work to offer a systematic
study of mantras; such study can be seen in the works of André
Padoux9 and the important volume of papers published by Alper,10
and Gonda’s important paper is still germane to the topic.11 In the
tantric traditions mantra is the sound form of the deity empowered
by the master and given at initiation. The master, says the M®lin¬,
                       The Tantric Body

illuminates the energy of mantra (mantrav¬rya),12 and K◊emar®ja in
his commentary on the ˆiva-s‚tras links the guru with the energy of
mantra and mudr®.13 This notion of mantrav¬rya is important in that
as the master enlivens the mantra, brings it to life as he would the
icon of a deity, so the mantrav¬rya is internalised by the practitioner.
Through mantra his body is brought to life as the divine body; the
repetition of mantra (japa) is clearly an entextualisation of the body.
This has to be well taught (su˜ik◊ita) says Abhinavagupta. Although
the mantra comes through the mouth of the master its real source
is pure consciousness, absolute subjectivity (aham), which is the
greatest mantra.14 Mantra embodies the energy of the deity, which is
activated by the master and through its repetition, thereby enabling
the adept, in Gonda’s words, ‘to exercise power over the potencies
manifesting in it, to establish connections between the divinity and
himself, or to realise his identity with that divinity.’15
    In his study of K◊emar®ja’s commentary on the ˆiva-s‚tras,
Alper shows how mantras must be taken on a number of levels,
in a social context (attitudes, expectations, socialisation) and in an
epistemological context as ‘tools for engendering (recognizing) a
certain state of affairs’.16 They also have illocutionary force in so far
as uttering the mantra is the performance of a ritual action, although
we must be aware here of the subtlety of the tantric cosmology that
links mantras to worlds, sign to function.17 Different mantras (and
therefore different deities) correspond to or have their source in
different levels of the cosmical hierarchy, as Padoux has shown.18 We
might say that mantras embody the vibrational energy of a higher
level of the cosmos and/or deity. By repeating the mantra the adept
is attempting to access or conform to the mantra’s source. As this
source is textual and revealed, the internalisation of the mantra
is making the body conform to the textual revelation. Repeating
mantras is entextualising the body.


                                 Icon

We have then, different forms of the tantric deity internalised by
the practitioner: the icon of inner vision, the mudr® as an expres-
sion of the deity, and the sound-form of the deity in mantra in
                     The Tantric Imagination                         

all tantric traditions, including the Buddhist where visions of the
body become highly ornate.19 The inner vision and mantra of the
deity also have external correlates in the icon. This is particularly
important in external worship which follows divinisation and mental
worship. The inner vision of the deity and retinue, which is the
man. ¥ala, has an external correlate installed and empowered as a
temporary focus for daily rites or on a more permanent basis as a
temple icon. The temple itself is an icon of the deity and the deity’s
body. The identiﬁcation of the temple with the deity is a standard
idea, well documented in medieval Hindu kingdoms (see pp. –).
As vision is to the practitioner’s body, so the icon in the temple is
to the temple as a whole. The representation of the body of the
deity at the heart of the temple is a correlate to the inner vision
of the deity by the practitioner, and as the external practice can be
seen as an extension of the inner practice of mental worship, so the
temple itself can be seen as an extension of the icon at its centre
– the extended body of the deity extended in precise ways as laid
down in tantric revelation.
    The material representation of the deity in the image or icon (m‚rti,
vigraha, bimba) is the correlate of the deity within the practitioner’s
body; indeed, the traditions of the left tend to disparage physical
manifestations of the deity as inferior. The representations that
remain generally follow the descriptions in the texts; material reality
follows textual prescriptions. A number of texts contain iconographic
descriptions of pantheons of deities, of particular note being the six-
teenth century Tantras®ra by Kr. ◊n. ®nanda,20 edited and translated by
Pal, and three texts translated by Bühnemann: the Mantramahodadhi,
also of the sixteenth century, the tenth-century Prapañcas®ra, and
the slightly later ˆ®rad®tilika by Lak◊man. a.21 Bühnemann observes
that these texts, while being tantric, were also Sm®rta, composed
by tantric, orthodox Sm®rta Brahmans for Brahmans. A discussion
of this material, generally much later than the texts that have been
our main concern here, would not contribute much to our argu-
ment; nevertheless it is signiﬁcant that the bodies of the deities are
represented in plastic form. Within the tantric imaginaire, this plastic
expression is a physical manifestation of a higher power, at least once
made subject to ritual invocation. We have, then, a two-stage process
                      The Tantric Body

of the forming of the icon in accordance with iconographic texts,
followed by the empowering of the image, the bringing down of the
deity into it by the qualiﬁed tantric priest. The icon is divinised in
a way that directly parallels the divinisation of the body; the icon
becomes the body of the deity and the mantra energised by the guru
becomes the body of the deity, as the human body becomes divinized
through the bh‚ta˜uddhi and ny®sa.


                            Indexicality
The practices of vision or visualisation (dhy®na), gesture (mudr®)
and divinizing the icon (m‚rti, bimba, vigraha) are shared across
the tantric traditions. To establish the idea of variable indexicality
more ﬁrmly we need to take a short, technical diversion, looking at
the language our texts use for ritual meditation or visualisation.22
The verbs used for ritual meditation or visualisation are from the
roots smr. , dhy®, bh‚. caus., and cint. The term smr. , ‘to remember’,
is particularly interesting, having a wider semantic ﬁeld than simply
recalling something past. Although a more thorough study of its
occurrences would be needed to substantiate the claim fully, the term
seems to refer to the holding of a mental image in imagination.23 In
terms of grammar in the texts we have presented, these verbs are
generally used in the third-person optative, the mood expressing a
wish, apart from gerundives, which is all-pervasive in these texts and
is nothing unusual, but is perhaps signiﬁcant in supporting our claim
about the body becoming inscribed by the text. Let us take three
random examples of the use of the optative from the Jay®khya.
. In context of the destruction of the earth element we read: ‘[The
   practitioner] should visualize a quadrangular, yellow earth, marked
   with the sign of thunder’.24
. At the completion of the dissolution of the water element, ‘with
   the inhaled breath he should bring to mind, O twice-born one,
   the body is its own sacred diagram, completely ﬁlled with that
   [water element].’25
. In the dissolution of the air element ‘he should meditate upon
   [the air element] pervading from the throat to the place of the
   navel.’26
                      The Tantric Imagination                          

   In these examples the main verb, ‘he should meditate’ ... etc, is in
the third-person singular optative, a mood which, according to the
famous grammarian P®n. ini, is used in ﬁve senses: to denote a com-
mand (vidhi), a summons (nimantran. a), an invitation (®mantran. a),
a respectful command (adh¬◊ﬂa), an enquiry (sam. pra˜na) or a request
(pr®rthana).27 All of these senses have the implication of conditions;
that the performance of certain actions will lead to certain future
effects. Indeed, the optative implies action and its effects in future
time, as it cannot refer to the past or to the actualised present. As
used here, the optative corresponds to P®n. ini’s analysis in that the
P®ñcar®trin’s religious discipline (vrata) is a command from the lord
(vidhi, as in ‘you must go to the village’ – gr®mam. bhav®n gacchet),
and is also an invitation (®mantran. a, as in ‘do sit here’ – iha bhav®n
®s¬ta) or a request from an authoritative source (pr®rthana, ‘I would
like to study grammar’ – vyakaran. am adh¬y¬ya).
   The analysis of the optative mood within different schools tended
to focus upon the relationship between the person or text uttering the
injunction, the receiver, and the action to be performed. According
to one commentator on P®n. ini, N®ge˜abhaﬂﬂa, the ﬁrst four deﬁni-
tions (vidhi etc.) can be included within a ﬁfth, namely pravartana
or ‘instigation’, an activity on the part of one person which leads to
another’s performing an action. There is a sequence of implication
in the use of the optative. Namely, that the instigation is uttered
by an authoritative person (®pta); that there is nothing inhibiting
the instigation; and that the ‘instigatee’ infers that the action he is
being asked to perform is something he desires and is achievable.28
N®ge˜a deﬁnes the qualiﬁed person as being one who is free from
confusion, anger and so on, and who does not perform actions that
lead to undesired results. A vidhi, he says, is connected with certain
properties of an action, the property of being a means to something
desired (i◊ﬂas®dhyatva), its feasibility (kr. tis®dhyatva), and the absence
of inhibitory factors (pratibandhak®bh®va).29 The use of the optative
in our texts is therefore consonant with this understanding.
   There is therefore an imperative to perform mental action as pre-
scribed in these texts, in the sense that if a certain course of action is
undertaken then certain results will follow, a fact that can be inferred
from the imperative coming from an authoritative source. Indeed, the
                       The Tantric Body

terms smaret (e.g. at .a), cintayet (e.g. at .a), dhy®yet (e.g. at
.a) and bh®vayet (e.g. at .a) are the same grammatical form
as terms denoting physical actions, such as imposing or infusing the
body with mantra (ny®set, e.g. at .b). In this sense, it would seem
that the use of the optative in the Tantras is akin to its use in the
Vedas, as in the injunction ‘one desirous of heaven should perform
the jyoti◊ﬂoma sacriﬁce’ (jyoti◊ﬂomena svargak®mo yajet).30 There is no
grammatical distinction within these texts between actions performed
‘in the mind’ and actions performed ‘with the body’. Indeed the
grammar points in quite the opposite direction to a mind/body
dualism, namely that mental action is directly akin to physical action,
and that as physical action has effect in the ritual realm, so too does
mental action. This is because the hierarchical cosmology assumed in
these ritual operations is a ‘magical’ cosmology that enables actions
(including mental action) to have effects at spatially and temporally
distinct locations.
    One might speculate further that the use of the optative, with
its implication of possible future action, is related to the imagina-
tion or the metaphorical space in which events and abstractions are
projected; a projection which is permitted by the very structure of
languages with at least three tenses.31 While, as Lakoff and Johnson
have shown, all of language is pervaded by metaphor,32 the use of
the optative is particularly suggestive of the possibility of metaphor
and of the kinds of mapping and overcoding on to the body that we
ﬁnd in our texts. The terms ks̄ipet and ny®set imply that the adept
should project the mantra or image into the metaphorical space of
his creative imagination. This is indeed a mental action that has
effect in that metaphorical space, and will have consequences for
the practitioner in terms of liberation at death.


                               Reading

The use of language and metaphorical space of projected meaning
allows for the identiﬁcation of the self with the implied ‘I’ of the
texts. While I have developed this in relation to scriptural traditions
elsewhere,33 we need brieﬂy to restate this fundamental idea here.
                     The Tantric Imagination                       

Reading these texts through a dialogical lens, the use of the optative
tells us something of the relationship between the ‘reader’ and the
‘text’, and tells us something about the nature of the self assumed.
In one conception, the fundamental structure of semiotics is an
addresser transmitting a message to an addressee, who receives it,
almost in a passive fashion, and decodes it. This requires ‘contact’
between the two, a ‘code’ in which the message is formulated, and a
‘context’ that gives sense to the message.34 In the case of the JS, for
example, the addresser, the redactor of the text, sends the message of
the text (the ritual representation) to an addresser, the P®ñcar®trin,
who receives it. If, however, we look at ritual representation through
the lens of dialogism, we are presented with a different picture.
The dialogists reject the emphasis on language as a purely abstract
system, seeing it rather as constantly changing and adapting to
concrete historical situations and not, to use Volosinov’s phrase,
as ‘a stable and always self-equivalent signal’.35 On this view the
meaning of words is governed by the contexts of their occurrence,
so utterance can be accounted for only as a social phenomenon.
Language is a process generated in the interaction of speakers
within social contexts. Turning to our texts, whereas a structuralist
reading of the JS and ISP might present the Brahmanical addressee
in purely passive terms as the decoder of a message from the text
(and from the past), a dialogical reading would see both addresser
and addressee as constructing the text’s meaning. That is, there is a
dialogical relationship between ‘sender’ and ‘receiver’ and meaning
is constructed between the two rather than passively received and
an original meaning decoded. This is more in line with Peircean
semiotics, where the basic pattern is threefold, of a sign, that to
which it points, and the interpreter.36
   This general relationship between the ‘reader’ and the ‘addresser’
can be more closely analysed and textually instantiated in terms of
what might be called a relationship between extra-textual indexicality
and intra-textual anaphora. The dialogical relationship is between
the implicit (Brahman) reader, a notional ‘I’, and the ‘characters’ of
the text who yet can function indexically as ‘I’s. Indeed, we have
already encountered deixis or metalepsis in our study, the idea that
ﬁrst- and second-person pronouns and locative and temporal adverbs
                       The Tantric Body

such as ‘here’ and ‘there’ can be contrasted with anaphoric terms
which refer to a previous item in a discourse (such as ‘he’, ‘she’,
‘it’ and ‘they’). Thus indexicality always refers outside of itself
to a context (as would be indicated by ‘you’ or ‘there’), whereas
anaphora does not refer outside of the utterance; the term ‘he’, for
example, would refer to a previously named person. The qualities
of indexicality are both generalised and referential, inexorably linked
to the context of utterance. When we shift to anaphoric terms, to
the third person for example, discourse ceases to have the indexical
qualities of deixic language. Anaphora is always discourse-internal
in that terms such as ‘he’ or ‘her’ are substitutes for some previ-
ously named person or entity. As has been discussed by Urban in
an important paper, a complication arises when apparently indexical
terms, particularly the ﬂoating signiﬁer ‘I’, are used anaphorically in
direct discourse.37 ‘I’ becomes anaphoric when placed in a sentence
such as ‘the Brahman said “I perform the sacriﬁce”’ where the ‘I’
does not refer to anything outside of the narrative itself. The ‘I’
is an empty sign in the sense that it is not referential with respect
to a speciﬁc reality. This is important in the context of the ritual
representations in tantric texts.
    The Jay®khya, for example, is a dialogue between the Lord
(Bhagav®n) and the sage N®rada, where N®rada is addressed in the
second person. The Lord uses the imperative, ‘hear this’ (tac chr. n. u),
which is anaphoric in that the implied tvam (‘you’) refers to the
sage often named in the vocative (‘O N®rada’). Yet ritual prescrip-
tions are usually in the third-person singular optative, as we have
seen above, in phrases such as ‘he should visualise’ or ‘remember’
or ‘know’. The third person here takes the place of the second
person directed to N®rada and indirectly to the reader of the text,
but its use serves to formalize and distance the discourse from any
direct indexical reference. The ritualist ‘reader’ of the text is being
addressed by the Lord indirectly through N®rada, who stands in
for the practitioner. Indeed the M¬m®m. saka school of philosophy
corroborates this general point in claiming that the use of the third
person optative in vedic injunction actually refers to ‘me’, the reader
of the text, performing the ritual injunction.38 We might make a
similar claim of the ritual injunction here. This linguistic form, the
                     The Tantric Imagination                      

objectiﬁcation of the ritual performer, has the effect of controlling
the dialogic relations between the characters and the reader, and of
allowing their identiﬁcation in imagination. In the passages cited
above, the anaphoric third person is indirectly understood by the
text’s receiver or reader to be referring to the indexical ‘I’. The
reader understands that the third person actually refers to ‘me’ (the
indexical ‘I’) through N®rada. The object of the second-person dis-
course is also the grammatical subject of the third-person optatives,
and moreover indirectly refers outside of the text to the reader.
    In this way, the text’s meaning is constructed through the iden-
tiﬁcation of the indexical ‘I’, the tantric Brahmanical reader of the
text, with the third person understood as though indexical. Yet being
articulated in the third person optative also maintains an impersonal
voice concordant with the claimed universality of the revelation.
The use of the optative allows for the imaginative identiﬁcation of
the indexical ‘I’ with the implied ‘I’ of the text itself. The grammar
of the text allows for the imaginative identiﬁcation of the reader
with the representation of the ritual practitioner and the structure
of the texts’ language, its ritual injunctions, allows for variable
indexicality.
    Through this kind of analysis we can see how the text achieves the
replication of ritual processes, and so the perpetuation of tradition,
through the identiﬁcation of the indexical ‘I’ with the anaphoric
third person in the optative mood. The third-person optative func-
tions as a substitute for an anaphoric ‘I’ in the text: the anaphoric
‘I’ is deferred through the third person. The social agent – the
tantric Brahmanical reader – wishes to close the gap between the
indexical ‘I’ (himself) and the deferred anaphoric ‘I’ of the texts
through imagination and projection into the metaphorical space al-
lowed by the use of the optative. Imagination provides awareness
of the possibility of transformation and the possibility of behaving
in a way that allows the goals of the tradition, internalized through
the identiﬁcation of the two ‘I’s, to be realised. The replication of
the text and the truth-value it contains for a community, suggests
furthermore that the text, as Urban and Silverstein have argued, is
a trope of culture which is constantly decontextualised, or liberated
from a speciﬁc historical context, and recontextualised in a new
                     The Tantric Body

context.39 Texts are the result of continuous cultural processes that
create and re-create them over again as meaningful objects or tropes,
which are constructed as having de-temporalised and de-spacialised
meanings.
   By way of conclusion, then, we can see this process occurring in
the divinisation of the body in the tantric ritual texts. These texts
transcend the boundaries of their production and are reconstituted
through the generations, especially through the identiﬁcation of
the reader of the text with the ritualist represented. The textual
representation of the bh‚ta˜uddhi is made meaningful both by the
content of the texts and by the construction of its meaning in the
imagination by the Brahmanical reader. One of the tasks in the
study of tantric traditions becomes the inquiry into the ways in
which these texts have been transmitted, their internalisation by the
individual practitioner, and the function of these texts within the
practices of the tradition. Through focusing on the divinisation of
the body, it is hoped that this work has made some contribution to
this understanding.
                            Epilogue




W          a long way in our journey into the tantric
        body. In many ways this account is preliminary in that there
are so many other texts that could be drawn on, critical editions of
many texts are still to be made, and the map of historical trajectory
of tantric traditions is far from complete. However, I hope to have
presented a coherent picture of the processes at work in the develop-
ment of representation and practice in some tantric material, namely
the ˆaiva and P®ñcar®tra traditions. I also hope to have contributed
to a corrective reading through presenting the tantric body in terms
of text and tradition rather than in terms of a popular misconcep-
tion of a dislocated ‘experience’. The tantric body that thrived in
tantric civilisation for centuries is not that of modernity. I hope to
have shown how the tantric body in tradition is less reiﬁed than its
modernist, literalist rendering, and how the subtle anatomy of the
tantric body must be located in text and tradition and seen in terms
of the body’s divinisation, which is, I have argued, the body being
inscribed by the text. This is, second, to show that the tantric body
is not only less reiﬁed than its modern version but more conservative
and tradition-based. The tantric body has been established within
traditions of speciﬁc revelation, ritual practice and initiatory teach-
ings from which it cannot be separated. Attempts to identify the
tantric body with eroticism in the West are distortions of a rich
                      The Tantric Body

and complex tradition. This distortion has taken two routes, one a
laudation of an imagined tantric body as being a way of maximising
erotic pleasure, the other a condemnation of the tantric body as
being irrational in promoting ‘magic’ and ‘immorality’, an attitude
found in nineteenth-century scholarship and in Hinduism itself in
the trajectory stemming from the Hindu renaissance.
   Yet while the tantric traditions are attenuated, the traditions that
do remain – in Kerala, for example – will inevitably continue to
undergo change and probable erosion. I suspect that the tantric
body is at odds with modernity because it can only be understood
in relation to a hierarchical cosmology in which the material world
is a coagulation of more subtle forces. Although there have been
attempts to reconcile or synthesise a hierarchical world-view with
an evolutionary perspective (in the work of Aurobindo, for example)
the order of being in the tantric universe remains at odds with a
materialist, evolutionary understanding of the world. The tantric
body of tradition is also at odds with contemporary expectations
about gender and a feminist discourse that implicitly questions and
critiques the tantric body.
   So does the tantric body have anything to say to us today? The
answer to this question is complex. Clearly there are elements within
the tantric body that have appeal in Western modernity but that have
been distorted through their extirpation from their historical and
textual locations. This appeal is inevitably linked to the critique of
religion as the history of error and the professed liberation of the
individual from a straitjacket of conservative, Christian morality.
There are, of course, Hindu-based traditions in the West, such as
Siddha Yoga, the Nityananda Institute, and the Western inheritors
of the Laksman Joo’s ‘Kashmir ˆaivism’, which claim to inherit the
tantric traditions, and indeed sometimes guru lineages can be traced
(as in the case of Laksman Joo), but inevitably these traditions are
strongly affected by modernity and the tantric body they promote
is not the tantric body of tradition. While all traditions undergo
constant reinvention in new generations, traditions in modernity
have been particularly susceptible to erosion. But the tantric body
does contain resources that could arguably contribute to discourse
in late modernity. Because the tantric body is so much a part of the
                              Epilogue                            

wider cosmos, there are perhaps ecological implications contained
within the traditions that those interested can draw upon, and there
are transformative implications of tantric practice that could be a
resource for those engaged with other traditions such as Christianity.
I am sceptical that Hindu tantric traditions could in their richness
be transplanted outside of the particular conditions of their past
ﬂourishing in South Asia. The Buddhist tantric traditions from Tibet
have had considerable success, but the Hindu tantric traditions do
not have the infrastructure or institutional history to affect such a
successful transfer across cultures. Yet our study of the tantric body
reveals a number of important things. The tantric body shows us
the importance of text and tradition in the construction of human
lives. It shows us a particular way of conceptualising the body dis-
tinct from either a Western dualism or materialism, it shows us
how subjectivity is formed by tradition, and it shows us that such
a tradition-formed subjectivity must be distinguished from Western
individuality. There is arguably a wisdom here that has implications
across cultures: that subjective transformations occur not through
the assertion of individuality but through subjecting self and body
to a master and to tradition.
                          

                The Jay®khya-sam. hit®,
                            Chapter 




Now the procedure for ﬁxing the mantra (Nyāsa)
– The reciter of mantras, whose body is completely pure [due to the
puriﬁcation of the body rite or bh‚ta˜uddhi], should perform the ﬁxing
of mantras [on the body]. Only through the imposition of mantras can
be become equal to the God of Gods. By this worship he wins power
(adhik®ra) over all outcomes and gains all supernatural powers. He will
then be fearless, even in a place crowded with bad people, and attain
victory over accidental death.

Making the throne
– Upon the raised plank on the ground previously described [at
.], [the practitioner should] set down an ocean and lotus [in his
imagination]. He should make effort with his own mantra accompanied
by visualisation, then having ﬁxed and visualised T®rk◊ya [i.e. Vi◊n. u’s
mount] he should sit down.

Making a protective wall around the throne
– Having repeatedly purged the directions with the Weapon mantra
(astra) and visualised the wall outside the throne like a web of arrows,
the practitioner should cover the wall with the protecting mantra
(kavaca), whose form is a shining breastplate. Like the perfected ones
dwelling in heaven, O twice born one, he can become invisible. He
should perform the ﬁxing of mantras on himself. He should perform
                              Appendix                              

the protection according to this ordinance, since they [the demons?]
take the strength of the mantra-born one who is not protected. Having
ﬁrst ﬁxed mantras on his hands, he should then perform the ﬁxing of
mantras on his body.

Fixing mantras on the hand
 The root (m‚la) mantra followed by the mantra of form (m‚rti) is
on his thumb, followed by the remaining deities in due order beginning
with the foreﬁnger.
– Having ﬁxed all [the deities] ending with the little ﬁnger, he
should fasten the [other] parts of the body [with mantra]. [He should
establish the deities] in due order beginning with the Heart mantra on
the little ﬁnger and so on. The Weapon mantra is on the thumb, whilst
the Eye mantra is on the tips of the ﬁngers. The Man-lion (nr. im. ha)
should be ﬁxed on the right hand and the sage Kapila on the left.
Beginning with the left hand [he should ﬁx] the Boar mantra on the
ﬁngers of both [hands]. The Kau◊ﬂubha mantra is on the right palm
and the Vanam®l® mantra on the other.
– He should ﬁx the Lotus mantra in the middle of the right palm
and the Conch mantra on the left palm. Afterwards, [he should ﬁx] the
brilliant, Disc-weapon mantra there as well. He should ﬁx the Club
mantra on the right hand, ﬂaming with its own splendour. Beginning
from the right thumb to the least part [the little ﬁnger] at the end of
the left, he should ﬁx the Garu¥a mantra on all ten ﬁngers in due order,
followed by the Bond mantra on the palm of the left hand and the Goad
mantra on the right.
 He should establish the Heart [and other mantras] on both hands
in due order. [Then he should ﬁx] the secondary mantras, the ﬁve Seed
mantras, beginning with Satya and ending with Aniruddha.
–b Then on both hands, from the ﬁngernails to the end of the
wrist, he should ﬁx the Seven Syllable mantra [i.e. the vy®paka mantra],
which is laid over all the other mantras. By this ordinance he should
perform the ﬁxing of the hands mentioned previously.

Fixing mantras on the body
c–b The powerful, supreme ˆakti is located in the cave of the
heart centre. Her form is the wind and [her power] is established as
tenfold. By her will through the current of the path of the hands, [ten
                       The Tantric Body

channels of power] have gone out [from her]. The ﬁngers are thus
regarded as containing the ten channels. So, O best of twice-born
ones, having ﬁrst ﬁxed the horde of mantras in the body of the Lord
where they are known as [his] powers (˜akti), one should then ﬁx the
elements.
c–b After placing the mass of mantras correctly on the body, the
root mantra on the body as before from head to feet, and having ﬁxed
[mantras] all over himself from his feet to the end of his head, he should
perform the ﬁxing of all parts [of the body] with the mantra of form.
c–b [He should ﬁx mantras] on his head, mouth, and left and right
buttocks, in due order, then on the heart, on the back, in the navel, on
the hips, on the knees, and then on the feet.
c–b In succession, beginning with n® and ending with h® there
are twenty-two syllables. After ﬁxing the mantra of form he should
then ﬁx the deities. On the left shoulder he should ﬁx Lak◊m¬ and on
the right K¬rt¬. Next he should ﬁx Jay® on the right hand and M®y® on
the left. Following [that he should ﬁx] the Limb mantras, [namely] the
Heart [mantra] and so on. The Heart mantra is placed on the breast
and the Head mantra on the head. The Tuft mantra is on the tuft and
Breastplate mantra on the shoulders. He should ﬁx the Eye mantra
on both eyes and the Weapon mantra on the palms of the hands, O
twice-born one.
c–c The Man-lion [he should ﬁx] on the right ear and the Kaplila
mantra at the throat.1 Having ﬁxed the chief mantra, Var®ha, at the
lower part of the left ear, [he should then ﬁx] the Kau◊ﬂubha mantra
in the middle of the chest and the Vanam®lika mantra at the throat.
Then [he should ﬁx] the Lotus mantra and so on, as before [in the
right palm], and, O twice-born one, the great G®ru¥a mantra between
the two thighs.
d–b Then he should ﬁx the group of secondary mantras beginning
with Aniruddha, O best of twice-born ones, in sequence on the feet,
between navel and penis, at the navel, at the heart, and at the base of
the tuft. He should once more ﬁx the ﬁvefold Satya mantra and so on
in succession, at the end of the aperture of Brahma, in the middle of
the heart, in the lotus of the navel, between the navel and penis, and
on the feet, in correct order. Then he should apply the great mantra
of seven syllables of Vi◊n. u, the Lord N®r®yan. a, to the body from the
head, like armour.
                               Appendix                                

c–. All mantras are located in him and he is in them. He is the
supreme power (karan. a) of this group of mantras and stands at their
head. Therefore one should ﬁx him over all.
–b The circle of powers is variously ﬁxed [in this way] from the
heart to the navel, O best of sages, and he establishes their connection
through mantra. Having performed the ﬁxing [of mantras] in this way,
he should next perform his own hand gesture for the mass of mantras
that have been ﬁxed, and for all of the root mantras and so on, on the
body and on the hands. [These gestures] are associated with his mantra
and how they are ﬁxed [on the body].
c– [The practitioner] should then visualise himself with his body
in the form of Vi◊n. u, possessing the six great qualities, by means of the
visualisation practice previously described.2 In this way his own form and
the form of the universe are imagined as possessing [a single] form.
–b I am the Lord Vi◊n. u, I am N®r®yan. a, Hari, and I am V®sudeva,
all pervading, the abode of beings,3 without taint. Thus having put
down the ego [he establishes] a ﬁrm form, O sage. The best practitioner
speedily becomes absorbed in that [form], due to the ﬁxing of mantras,
due to visualisation, and due to being in the midst of contemplation
born from yoga.
c–b The action of ﬁxing has been concisely taught to you by me.
Practising diligently you must guard [this ritual knowledge] against
others.


       The Mantras Used in these Ritual Sequences

This table is derived from the mantras given by the editor of the
Jay®khya, Embar Krishnamacharya, pp. –. Rastelli also gives a
list of mantra names associated with ny®sa, Philosophisch-theologisch
Grundanschaungen der Jay®khyasam. hit®, pp. –.

The mūla mantra with the mūrti mantra
om. k◊¬m. k◊iΩ namaΩ, n®r®yan. ®ya vi˜v®tmane hr¬m. sv®h®

The Śakti mantras
Lak◊m¬ mantra om. l®m. lak◊myai namaΩ, paramalak◊m®v®sthit®yai l®m.
  ˜r¬m. hr¬m. sv®h®
                     The Tantric Body

K¬rti mantra om. k®m. k¬rttyai namaΩ, sadodit®nantdavigrah®yai hr¬m.
   kr. ¬m. sv®h®
Jay® mantra om. j®m. jay®yai namaΩ, ajitadh®m®vasthit®yai j®m. jr¬m.
   sv®h®
M®y® mantra om. m®m. m®y®yai namaΩ, moh®t¬tapad®˜rit®yai m®m.
   mr¬m. sv®h®
       .
The an ga mantras
Hr. t mantra om. ham. namaΩ, om. ham. saΩ ˜uci◊ade hr. day®ya namaΩ
ˆiras mantra om. h®m. namaΩ, om. parabrahma˜irase sv®h®
ˆikha mantra om. h¬m. namaΩ, om. pradyotani˜ikh®yai va◊aﬂ
kavaca mantra om. hum. namaΩ, om. ˜®˜vata˜aran. yakavac®ya hum.
netra mantra om. haum. namaΩ, prak®˜aprajvalanetr®ya vau◊aﬂ
astra mantra om. haΩ namaΩ, ‛d¬ptodr. ptaprabha astr®ya phaﬂ

The vaktra mantras
Nr. sim. ha mantra om. ﬂjrom. ﬂj dmruaum. namaΩ, jvalan®yutad¬ptaye
    nr. sim. h®ya sv®h®
Kapila mantra om. ﬂh‚m ﬂghr‚aum. namaΩ, anantabh®s®ya kapil®ya
    sv®h®
                                                  .
Var®ha mantra om. ﬂglom. ﬂsv‚m. namaΩ, kr. ◊n. apin gal®ya par®h®ya
    sv®h®

The lāñchana mantras
Kaustubha mantra om. ﬂham. rhr‚m. ﬂham. namaΩ prabh®tmane
    kaustubh®ya sv®h®
Vanam®la mantra om. lsb¬m. namaΩ sthalajalodbh‚tabh‚◊ite vanam®le
    sv®ha
Padma mantra om. bsum. namaΩ ˜r¬niv®sapadm®ya sv®ha
    .                                                  .
ˆan kha mantra om. h‚m. h‚m. h‚m. namaΩ mah®˜an kh®ya sv®ha
Cakra mantra om. jraΩ kraΩ phaﬂ h‚m. namaΩ phaﬂphaﬂpha¥vi◊n. ucakr®ya
    sv®ha
Gad® mantra om. gmlem. jl.m    . namaΩ sahasr®˜rigade sv®ha
Garu¥a mantra om. rk◊r‚aum. rkhr‚auΩ namaΩ anantagataye garu¥®ya
    sv®ha
P®˜a mantra om. rn. am. ka¥h¥ha ka¥h¥ha ﬂhaﬂha parap®˜®ya sv®ha
  .
An ku˜a mantra om. lr. m. kr. m. ni˜itaghon. ®ya sv®ha
                             Appendix    

The upāṅga mantras
Satya b¬ja mantra om. k◊aum. om.
V®sudeva b¬ja mantra om. h‚m. om.
   .
San kar◊an. a b¬ja mantra om. s‚m. om.
Pradyumna b¬ja mantra om. ◊¬m. om.
Aniruddha b¬ja mantra om. ˜®m. om.
           Abbreviations and Sources




AD     §gama¥ambara of Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa. V. Raghavan and A Thakur (eds.),
       §gama¥ambara, Otherwise called —an. matan®ﬂaka of Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa
       (Darbhanga: Mithila Institute, ).
AG     §gamapram®n. ya of Y®muna. M. Narasimhachary (ed.), §gamapram®n. ya
       of Y®muna (Baroda: Oriental Institute, ). English translation by
       J.A.B. van Buitenen, Y®muna’s §gamapr®m®nya or Treatise on the
       Validity of P®ñcar®tra. Sanskrit Text and English Translation (Madras:
       R®m®nuja Research Society, ).
Ajit   Artha˜®stra. R.P. Kangle, The Kautilya Artha˜®stra (University of
       Bombay, nd edn, ).
A◊ﬂ    A◊ﬂ®dhy®y¬ of P®n. ini. Trans. Sumitra M. Katre (Delhi: MLBD,
       ).
Bhut   Bh‚ta˜uddhi. Transcript no.  (Pondicherry: Institut Français
       d’Indologie, n.d.).
DH     Dehasthadevat®cakrastotra. H. Sri Ragunath Temple Manuscript
       Library, Jammu, pp. –, –. Copy courtesy of Alexis
       Sanderson. French translation by L. Silburn, Hymnes aux K®l¬, La
       Roue des Énergies Divine (Paris: de Boccard, ), pp. –. Source
       unattributed, but probably from the text published by Pandey which
       differs slightly from the Ragunath Temple manuscript.
IP     ¡˜varapratyabhijñ®-k®rik® by Utpalaseva. Ed. M.S. Kaul (Srinagar:
       KSTS no. , ).
IPV    ¡˜varapratyabhijñ®vimar˜in¬ by Abinavagupta, vol., ed. M.R. ˆ®stri
       (Srinagar: KSTS, no. , ); vol. , ed. M.S. Kaul (Srinagar:
       KSTS no. , ). English translation by K.C. Pandey, edited with
       K.A.S. Iyer, Bh®skar¬,  vols (Delhi: MLBD reprint,  [,
       , ]).
                     Abbreviations and Sources                                  

ISG      ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati. Ed. M.M.T. Gan. apati ˆ®str¬ with an
         introduction by N.P. Unni, ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva Paddhati of ¡˜®na˜iva
         Gurudeva,  vols (Delhi and V®r®n. as¬: Bharatiya Vidy® Prakashan,
         ).
JS       Jay®khya-sam. hit® of the P®ñcar®tra §gama. Ed. E. Krishnamacharya
         (Baroda: Gaekwad’s Oriental Series, no. , ).
KA       K®mik®gama (Uttara Bh®ga). Ed. ˆr¬ C. Svaminathasivacarya
         (Madras: South Indian Archarkar Association, ).
Kaul     Kaulajñ®nanirn. aya and Some Minor Texts of the School of Matsyen-
         dran®th. Ed. P.C. Bagchi (Calcutta Sanskrit Series, ). English
         translation by Michael Magee, Kaulajñ®na-nirn. aya of the School of
         Matsyendran®tha Tantra Granthamala no.  (Varanasi: Prachaya
         Prakashan, ).
KMT      Kubjik®mata-tantra. Critical edition by T. Goudriaan and J.A.
         Schoterman, The Kubjik®matatantra, Kulalik®mnaya Version (Leiden:
         Brill, ).
KSTS     Kashmir Series of Texts and Studies.
KirT     Kiran. a-tantra. Bhaﬂﬂa R®makan. ﬂha’s Commentary on the Kiran. atantra,
         vol.  chapters –. Critical edition and annotated translation by
         Dominic Goodall (Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie, ).
KT       Kul®rn. ava-tantra. Edited and translated by Arthur Avalon (London:
         Tantrik Texts vol. , ).
KumT     Kum®ratantra. Jean Filliozat, Le Kum®ratantra de R®van. a et les textes
         parallèles Indiens, Tibétains, Chinois, Cambodgien, et Arabe (Paris:
         Imprimerie Nationale, ).
LT       Lak◊m¬-tantra. A P®ñcar®tra ®gama. Ed. Pandit V. Krihnamacharya
         (Madras: Adyar Library and Research Centre, ). English transla-
         tion by Sanjukta Gupta, The Lak◊m¬ Tantra (Leiden: Brill, ).
Manu     M®navadharma˜®stra, the Code of Manu. Critically edited by J. Jolly
         (London: Trübner, ). Manu˜®stravivaran. a. J. Duncan Derrett M.
         Bharuci’s Commentary on the Manusmr. ti (the Manu-˜®stra-vivarana,
         books –), text, translation and notes, vol.  (Wiesbaden: Franz
         Steiner, ).
MManj    Mah®rthamañjari with parimala by Mahe˜var®nanda. Ed. M.R. ˆ®str¬
         (Srinagar: KSTS, no. , ). French translation by Lilian Silburn,
         La Mah®rthamañjari de Mahe˜var®nanda (Paris: de Boccard, ).
MNPrak   Mah®nayaprak®˜a edited by K. S®mba˜iva ˆ®str¬, Trivandrum
         Sanskrit Series  (Trivandrum: Government Press, ).
Mrg      Mr. gendr®gama (Kriy®p®da et Cary®p®da) avec le commentaire de
         Bhaﬂﬂa N®r®yan. akn. ﬂha. Critically edited by N.R. Bhatt (Pondicherry:
         Institut Français d’Indologie, ). French translation by Hélène
         Brunner-Lachaux, Mr. gendr®gama: section des rites et section du
         comportement avec la vr. tti de Bhaﬂﬂa N®r®yan. akan. ﬂha (Pondicherry:
         Institut Français d’Indololgie, ). French translation by Michel
         Hulin, Mr. gendr®gama: sections de la doctrine et du yoga avec la vr. tti de
         Bhaﬂﬂan®r®yan. akantha et la dipika d’Aghorásiv®c®rya. (Pondicherry:
         Institut Français d’Indololgie, ).
                         The Tantric Body

MVT      M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra. Ed. M.S. Kaul (Sringar: KSTS no. ,
         ).
MVT vart M®lin¬˜lokav®rttika. Jürgen Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of
         Revelation: M®lin¬˜lokav®rttika I, – (Groningen: Egbert Forsten,
         ).
                .
MTP      Matangaparame˜var®gama. See below.
                .
MTPVrt Matangaparame˜var®gama (vidy®p®da), avec le commentaire de Bhaﬂﬂa
         R®makan. ﬂha. Critically edited by N.R. Bhatt (Pondicherry: Institut
         Français d’Indologie, ).
NeT      Netra-tantra with uddyota by K◊emar®ja. Ed. M.S. Kaul,  vols
         (Srinagar: KSTS nos  and ,  and ).
NJ       Ny®yamañjari of Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa. English translation by V.N. Jha
         (Delhi: ˆr¬ Satguru publications, ).
PH       Pratyabhijñ®hr. daya by K◊emar®ja. Ed. J.C. Chatterji (Sringar: KSTS
         no. , ). English translation by Jaideva Singh, Pratyabhijñ®hr. daya
         (Delhi: MLBD, ).
PS       Param®rthas®ra by Abhinavagupta with vivr. ti by Yogar®ja. Ed. J.C.
         Chatterjee (Srinagar: KSRTS no. , ). French translation by
         Lilian Silburn, La Param®rthas®ra (Paris: de Boccard, ).
Ptlv     Par®tr¬˜ik®laghuvr. tti by Abhinavagupta. Edited with notes by Mahama-
         hopadhyaya Pandit Mukunda Rama Shâstrî (Srinagar: KSTS, vol. ,
         ). French translation by André Padoux, La Par®tr¬˜ik®laghuvr. tti
         de Abhinavagupta, Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne,
         fasc.  (Paris: de Boccard, ). English translation by Paul Muller-
         Ortega, The Triadic Heart of ˆiva: Kaula Tanrism of Abhinavagupta in
         the Non-dual Shaivism of Kashmir (Albany: SUNY Press, ), pp.
         –.
Ptv      Par®tr¬˜ik®vivaran. a. Jaideva Singh, Abhinavagupta: A Trident of
         Wisdom, Text and translation (Delhi: MLBD, ).
RA       Raurav®gama. Critical edition by N.R. Bhatt,  vols (Pondicherry:
         Institut Français d’Indologie, ).
RAot     Rauravottar®gama. Critical edition by N.R. Bhatt (Pondicherry:
         Institut Français d’Indologie, ).
Sard     S®rdhatri˜atik®lottar®gama avec le commentaire de Bhaﬂﬂa
         R®makan. ﬂha. Critical edition by N.R. Bhatt (Pondicherry: Institut
         Français d’Indologie,).
SP       ˆilpaprak®˜a, a Medieval Orissan Sanskrit Text on Temple Architecture
         by R®macadra Kaul®c®ra. English translation by Alica Boner and
         Sad®˜iva Rath ˆarma (Leiden: Brill, ).
Spand    Spandaprad¬pik® by Utpal®c®rya. Ed. Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, The
         Spandaprad¬pik®, a Commentary on the Spandak®rik® (Varansi: private
         publication, ).
SSP      Soma˜ambhupaddhati. Ed. and French trans. by Hélène Brunner-
         Lachaux,  vols (Pondicherry: Institut Française d’Indologie, vol. ,
         ; vol. , ; vol. , ; vol. , ).
                      Abbreviations and Sources                              

SSV       ˆiva-s‚tra-vimar˜in¬ by K◊emar®ja. Ed. Jagadisha Chandra Chatterji
          (Srinagar: KSTS, vol. , ). English translation by Jaideva Singh
          (Delhi: MLBD, ).
SVT       Svacchandabhairava-tantra with uddyota by K◊emar®ja. Ed. M.S.
          Kaul,  vols (Srinagar: KSTS, –); reprinted in  vols (Delhi:
          Sanskrit Gian Sansthan, ).
TA        Tantr®loka by Abhinavagupta with viveka by Jayaratha,  vols. Ed.
          by M.S. ˆ®str¬ (vol. ) and M.S. Kaul (vols –) (Srinagar: KSTS,
          –). Edition by R.C. Dwivedi and N. Rastogi,  vols (Delhi:
          MLBD, ). Italian translation by R. Gnoli, La Lucce delle Sacre
          Scritture (Torino: Boringheri, ). French translation by Lilian
          Silburn and André Padoux, La Lumière sur les Tantras: La Tantr®loka
          d’Abhinavagupta chapitres  à  (Paris: de Boccard, ).
TatPrak   Tattvaprak®˜a Siddh®nta˜aiva dar˜anam by Bhojadeva with t®tparya-
          d¬pik® and vr. tti Commentaries by ˆr¬ Kum®radeva and Aghora˜iv®charya.
          Ed. Kameshwar Nath Mishra (V®r®n. as¬: Chaukhamba Orientalia,
          ).
TS        Tantras®ra by Abhinavagupta. Ed. M.S. Kaul (Srinagar: KSTS no.
          , ).
TSam      Tantrasamuccaya by N®r®yan. a with the commentary vimar˜in¬ of
          ˆan. kara. Ed. M.T. Gan. apati ˆ®str¬ with an introduction by B.P. Unni
          (Delhi: Nag Publishers,  [].
                               .
TSG       Tantra S®ra San graha with commentary, critcially edited by M.
          Duraiswami Aiyangar (Madras: Government Oriental Manuscripts
          Library, ).
VK        V®kyap®diya by Bhartr. hari. Ed. with English translation by K.A.S.
          Iyer,  vols (Delhi: Motilal Banarsidass, ).
YH        Yogin¬hr. daya. A. Padoux, Le coeur de la yogini: Yogin¬hr. daya avec le
          commentaire D¬pik® D’Amr. t®nanda (Paris: de Boccard, ).
YT        Yoni-tantra. J.A. Schoterman, The Yoni Tantra Critically Edited with
          Introduction (Delhi: Manohar, ).
                                  Notes




                                Chapter 1

. M. Monier-Williams, Hinduism (London: Society for the Promotion of
   Christian Knowledge, ), p. .
. M. Monier-Williams, Br®hmanism and Hinduism or Religious Life and Thought
   in India (London: John Murray,  []), p. . It is, of course, easy
   to take pot shots at texts from the colonial past that reﬂect very different
   values to those of late modernity. This is not my intention. I wish, rather, to
   point to one important way in which Tantrism has been represented. Monier
   Williams is in many ways an exemplary scholar. His value judgements aside,
   his comments on the texts are remarkably accurate considering the limited
   knowledge of these traditions available to him.
. Bhagavan Shree Rajneesh, The Book of Secrets : Discourses on the Vigyan
   Bhairav Tantra (Poona: Rajneesh Foundation, ), pp. –.
. I take ‘ﬁrst-order discourse’ to be the texts of tradition or tradition itself;
   second-order discourse is the application of methods (such as critical read-
   ing, text editing and so on) to the ﬁrst-order discourse; and third-order dis-
   course is metatheoretical reﬂection that assumes the second-order discourse
   but wishes to go beyond this in establishing interpretations and theories
   that exceed the texts themselves. We might say that a third-order discourse
   allows reﬂection on a ﬁrst-order discourse through its being embedded
   in that third order, through the second-order discourse. Translated to a
   terminology of phenomenology, the noema is linked to the noesis through
   the second-order discourse. To use a different kind of terminology, we have
   a dialogical process of constantly shifting readers; the dialogical process
   mediated through the structures of reading.
. I am aware that these are Western, and so contentious, categories to use in
                                     Notes                                    

    the context of Tantra. I tend not to put such terms in scare quotes. For now
    I shall simply say that we have to use some categories and some language
    in which to describe these traditions on to which terminologies of the
    traditions can be mapped. As will become clear, I do not hold to a strong
    incommensurability thesis.
 . Inden substitutes this phrase for ‘ritual’. R. Inden, ‘Introduction: From
    Philological to Dialogical Texts’, in R. Inden, Jonathan S. Walters, and Daud
    Ali, Querying the Medieval: Texts and the History of Practices in South Asia
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –; p. .
 . I am indebted to James Gentry for this felicitous phrase. On my under-
    standing of subjectivity, see G. Flood, The Ascetic Self: Subjectivity, Memory
    and Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
 . One particularly pervasive Western reiﬁcation is ‘tantric sex’. See, for
    example, Val Sampson, Tantra: The Art of Mind Blowing Sex (London:
    Vermilion, ), although many others could be cited. White has argued
    against this Western appropriation: D. White, The Kiss of the Yogin¬: ‘Tantric
    Sex’ in its South Asian Contexts (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    ), pp, xii–xv, .
 . Northrop Frye, Fearful Symmetry: A Study of William Blake (Boston MA:
    Beacon Press, ), p. .
. See Hugh Urban, Tantra (California University Press, ), especially pp.
    –. On the pioneer of tantric studies, John Woodroffe, see Kathleen
    Taylor, Sir John Woodroffe, Tantra and Bengal: ‘An Indian Soul in a European
    Body’? (Richmond: Curzon Press, ).
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, in S. Sutherland et
    al. (eds), The World’s Religions (London: Routledge, ), pp. –; pp.
    –. For an account of the structure of the ˆaiva tantric canon founded
    on Sanderson’s work, see Mark Dyczkowski, The Canon of the ˆaiv®gama
    and the Kubjik® Tantras of the Western Kaula Tradition (Albany NY: SUNY
    Press, ).
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, p. .
. Gavin Flood, ‘Introduction: Establishing the Boundaries’, in G. Flood (ed.),
    The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –;
    p. .
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism: Its Development and Impact’ (incomplete
    draft, ), p. . Note  gives full references to the use of the term by the
    historian ˆr¬v®ra, who was at the court of Sultan Zain-ul-abidin (r. –).
    For the use of the term in Bengal, see J.T. O’Connell, ‘The Word “Hindu”
    in Gaudiya Vai◊n. ava Texts’, Journal of the American Oriental Society /
    (), pp. –. Also see Julius Lipner, ‘Ancient Banyan: An Inquiry into
    the Meaning of “Hinduness”’, Religious Studies  (), pp. –.
. Inden, ‘Introduction’, p. .
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘Vajray®na: Origin and Function’, in Mettanando
    Bhikkhu et al. (eds), Buddhism into the Year  (Bangkok and Los
    Angeles: Dhammakaya Foundation, ), pp. –; ‘History Through
    Textual Criticism in the Study of ˆaivism, the P®ñcar®tra and the Buddhist
    Yogin¬tantras’, in François Grimal (ed.), Les sources et le temps (Pondicherry:
                         The Tantric Body

    École Français de’Extrême Orient, ), pp. –; D. Snellgrove, Indo-
    Tibetan Buddhism: Indian Buddhists and Their Tibetan Successors (London:
    Serindia Publications, ), pp. –.
. For a stimulating and insightful discussion of the problem of internal and
    external deﬁnitions, see André Padoux, ‘Concerning Tantric Traditions’, in
    G. Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II: Miscellenea to the Phenomenon
    of Tantras (Vienna: Der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften,
    ), pp. –.
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, p. ; ‘Purity and Power
    Among the Brahmans of Kashmir’, in Michael Carruthers, Steven Collins
    and Steven Lukes (eds), The Category of the Person (Cambridge: Cambridge
    University Press, ), pp. –.
. Padoux, ‘Concerning Tantric Traditions’, p. .
. White, The Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. Padoux, ‘Concerning Tantric Traditions’, p. .
. E.g. the generally excellent early study by T. Goudriaan, S. Gupta and D.
    van Hoens, Hindu Tantrism (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –, although the list
    of eighteen characteristics is not exclusively tantric.
. André Padoux, ‘Tantrism’, in M. Eliade (general ed.), The Encyclopaedia of
    Religions (New York: Macmillan, ), vol. , pp. –; p. .
. White, David ‘Introduction’, in D. White (ed.), Tantra in Practice (Princeton:
    Princeton University Press, ),p. : ‘Tantra is that Asian body of beliefs
    and practices which, working from the principle that the universe we experi-
    ence is nothing other than the concrete manifestation of the divine energy
    of the godhead that creates and maintains that universe, seeks to ritually
    appropriate and channel that energy, within human microcosm, in creative
    and manipulative ways.’
. R.M. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric
    Movement (New York: Columbia University Press, ), p. . Tantra
    as a quest for power has also been emphasised by Brunner in her focusing
    on the ﬁgure of the s®dhaka. See ‘Le s®dhaka, personnage oublié de l’Inde
    du Sud’, Journal Asiatique, , pp. –. See also the discussion by
    Phylis Granoff, ‘Other People’s Rituals: Ritual Eclectism in Early Medieval
    Indian Religious [sic]’, Journal of Indian Philosophy  (), pp. –;
    p. .
. Sanderson, ‘Purity and Power’, pp. –; TA .–b, ref. in ibid., p.
    , n.
. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, p. , developing Douglas Brooks, The
    Secret of the Three Cities (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), pp.
    –.
. Brooks, The Secret of the Three Cities, p. .
. Perhaps the most popular and inﬂuential presentation of prototype effects
    in language is George Lakoff Women, Fire and Dangerous Things: What
    Categories Reveal about the Mind (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    ), pp. –. Lakoff draws on and develops the prototype theory of
    Eleanor Rosch, ‘Prototype Classiﬁcation and Logical Classiﬁcation: The
    Two Systems’, in E. Scholnick (ed.), New Trends in Cognitive Representation:
                                    Notes                                    

    Challenges to Piaget’s Theory (Hillsdale NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum Associates,
    ), pp. –; discussed in Lakoff, Women, Fire and Dangerous Things,
    pp. –.
. Lakoff, Women, Fire and Dangerous Things, pp. –, –, –.
. A.M. Hocart, Kings and Councillors: An Essay in the Comparative Anatomy
    of Human Society, edited by Rodney Needham (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press,  []), pp. –.
. Tsong-ka-pa, Tantra in Tibet: The Great Exposition of Secret Mantra, trans.
    and ed. J. Hopkins, vol.  (London and Sydney: Unwin Hyman, 
    []), pp. –. Thanks to Suzanne Besenger for alerting me to Tsong-
    ka-pa’s understanding.
. A reference in the ˆatapatha Br®hman. a ...– about the self becoming
    divine, passing from men to the gods, does not seem to refer speciﬁ-
    cally to the divinisation of the body. Julius Eggeling (trans.), The ˆatapatha
    Br®hman. a, vol. , Sacred Books of the East, vol.  (Oxford: Clarendon
    Press, ). Thanks to Craig Danielson for this reference.
. I have argued this point in The Ascetic Self, pp. – and passim.
. See Granoff, ‘Other People’s Rituals’ p. .
. A. MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry: Encyclopedia, Genealogy
    and Tradition (Notre Dame: University of Notre Dame Press, ), pp.
    –.
. W.D. Whitney, Sanskrit Grammar (Cambridge MA: Harvard University
    Press, ), p. . Rajneesh is insightful here when he claims that ‘tantra
    is pure technique’. Rajneesh, The Book of Secrets, p. . The sufﬁx tr® has
    also been taken to be from the root tr.¯ , to cross over; thus Tantra would be
    that which enables the crossing over the ocean of birth and death.
. J. Gonda, ‘The Indian Mantra’, Oriens  (), pp. –; pp. –.
. S. Pollock, ‘The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, – : Transculturation,
    Vernacularization, and the Question of Ideology’, in Jan E.M. Houben (ed.),
    Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit
    Language (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –.
. G. Flood, Body and Cosmology in Kashmir ˆaivism (San Francisco: Mellen
    Research University Press, ), pp. –; Sanderson ‘Purity and Power’,
    p. .
. Abhinavagupta TAV, vol. , pp. , –, –; Sanderson, ‘Purity and
    Power, p.  and n. The idea is echoed in later texts such as the Yoni-
    tantra .: ‘Privately a ˆ®kta, outwardly a ˆaiva, among people a Vai◊n. ava,
    bearing various outward appearances the followers of the Kula system spread
    over the earth’ (AntaΩ ˜®kt®Ω bahiΩ ˜aivaΩ sabh®y®m vai◊n. av®Ω mat®Ω/
    n®n®r‚padhar®Ω kaul®Ω vicaranti mah¬tale). Translated and discussed by J.A.
    Schoterman, The Yoni Tantra, Critically Edited with Introduction (Delhi:
    Manohar, ), p. .
. Weston La Barre, The Ghost Dance: Origins of Religion (London: Allen &
    Unwin, ), pp. –. There are spiritual practices, such as breathing
    techniques, in both East and West that may share a common heritage and
    probably reach back into prehistory. See Mircea Eliade, Yoga: Immortality
    and Freedom, trans. W.R. Trask (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press,
                          The Tantric Body

    ), pp. –. On archaic ideas in Greek thought, see E.R. Dodds, The
    Greeks and the Irrational (Berkeley: University of California Press, ),
    pp. –. J.-P. Vernant, Mythe et pensée chez les Grecs: études de psychologie
    historique (Paris: La Découverte, ), pp. ff, f.
. Robert Mayer, ‘The Origins of the Esoteric Vajray®na’, The Buddhist Forum,
    October , pp. –.
. Bernard Sergent, Genèse de l’Inde (Paris: Payot & Rivages, ), p. .
. Richard Gombrich, How Buddhism Began: The Conditioned Genesis of the
    Early Teachings (London: Athlone, ), pp. –.
. White, The Kiss of the Yogin¬, pp. –.
. Sergent, Genèse de l’Inde, p. .
. MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions, p. .
. MacIntyre puts this strongly: ‘The notion of a single neutral non-partisan
    history is one more illusion engendered by the academic standpoint of the
    encyclopedist; it is the illusion that there is the past waiting to be discovered,
    wie es eigentlich gewesen, independent of characterisation from some particu-
    lar standpoint’ (ibid., p. ).
. E. Blondel, Nietzsche: The Body and Culture. Philosophy as Philological
    Genealogy, trans. Sean Hand (Stanford CA: Stanford University Press,
    ), p. .
. Inden, ‘Introduction: From Philological to Dialogical Texts’, pp. –.
. Peter Ochs, Peirce, Pragmatism and the Logic of Scripture (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
. See Oliver Davies and Gavin Flood, Religion as Reading: Text, Ritual,
    Asceticism (forthcoming).
. D. Goodall, Bhatta Ramakantha’s Commentary on the Kiranatantra vol. ,
    chs – (Pondicherry: Institut Français de Pondichéry, ), p. cxix.
. Greg Urban, ‘The “I” of Discourse’, in Benjamin Lee and Greg Urban
    (eds), Semiotics, Self and Society (Berlin and New York; Mouton de Gruyter,
    ), pp. –.
. For a further elaboration of this theory of religious reading and textual
    reception, see Davies and Flood, Religion as Reading. See also G. Flood,
    Beyond Phenomenology: Rethinking the Study of Religion (New York and
    London: Cassell, ), pp. –.
. M. Silverstein and G. Urban (eds), Natural Histories of Discourse (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, ), pp. –.
. On this see M.L. Lyon and J.M. Barbalet, ‘Society’s Body: Emotion and the
    “Somatization” of Social Theory’, in Thomas J. Csordas (ed.), Embodiment
    and Experience: The Existential Ground of Culture and Self (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
. Csordas, ‘Preface’, Embodiment and Experience, p. xi.
. Brian Turner, ‘The Body in Western Society: Social Theory and Its
    Perspectives’, in Sarah Coakley (ed.), Religion and the Body (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –. See also his review article
    ‘What is the Sociology of the Body?’, Body and Society / (), pp.
    –.
                                     Notes                                    

. Thomas Csordas, ‘Introduction: The Body as Representation and Being in
    the World’, in Embodiment and Experience, pp. –.
. M. Mauss, ‘Les techniques du corps’, in Sociologie et Anthropologie (Paris:
    Presses Universitaires de France, ).
. Robert Hertz, ‘The Pre-eminence of the Right Hand: A Study in Religious
    Polarity’, trans. Rodney Needham, in R. Needham (ed.), Right and Left,
    Essays on Dual Symbolic Classiﬁcation (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    ), pp. –. Translation of Hertz ‘La prééminence de la main droit:
    étude sur la polarité religieuse’, Revue Philosophique  (), pp. –.
. The literature here is vast, but important points of reference are the volumes
    edited by M. Feher et al., Fragments for a History of the Human Body, 
    vols (New York: Urzone, ); P.A. Mellor and C. Shilling, Re-forming
    the Body: Religion, Community and Modernity (London: Sage, ). There
    is also a journal Body and Society dedicated to exploring the links between
    body and culture, and Cultural Values and Theory, Culture and Society are
    important in giving the body central place in cultural discourse.
. Paul Schilder, The Image and Appearance of the Human Body (New York:
    International University Press,  []).
. Turner, ‘The Body in Western Society’, p. .
. D. Haraway, ‘Investment Strategies for the Evolving Portfolio of Primate
    Females’, in Mary Jacobus, Evelyn Fox Keller, and Sally Shuttleworth (eds),
    Body/Politics: Women and the Discourse of Science (New York: Routledge,
    ), pp. –. Discussed by Csordas, ‘Introduction’, in Embodiment and
    Experience, pp. –.
. Sarah Coakley, ‘Introduction’, in Religion and the Body, p. .
. I say inappropriate because critical theory originally and more usefully
    referred to the Frankfurt School, the powerful, recent expression being
    Habermas’s work, which looks to the completion of the Enlightenment
    project. But the term in recent years has come to refer to almost any
    theoretical, genealogical critique. In some ways this is ironic as there is
    fundamental tension between the critical theory of the Frankfurt School,
    with its universalist aspirations, and the genealogists such as Foucault, whose
    thinking is generally opposed to such aspirations, although still aligned with
    the political left. See Michael Kelly (ed.), Critique and Power: Recasting the
    Foucault/Habermas Debate (Canbridge MA: MIT Press, ). I would wish
    to restrict the term ‘critical theory’ much more usefully to Habermas and
    the Frankfurt School in contrast to the ‘genealogy’ of Foucault and others
    drawing on Nietzsche rather than Marx.
. See for example, the interesting collection of essays by Londa Schiebinger
    (ed.), Feminism and the Body (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ).
. M. Foucault, The Order of Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences
    (London: Routledge, ), p. .
. A. MacIntyre, After Virtue: A Study in Moral Theory (London: Duckworth,
    ), p. .
. For references and for an illuminating essay on the subject of experience
    in religion, see Robert H. Scharf, ‘Experience’, in Mark C. Taylor (ed.),
                         The Tantric Body

    Critical Terms for Religious Studies (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    ), pp. –.
. S. Katz, ‘Language, Epistemology and Mysticism’, in S. Katz (ed.), Mysticism
    and Philosophical Analysis (London: Sheldon Press, ), pp. –.
. Robert R. Desjarlais, Body and Emotion the Aesthertics of Illness and Healing
    in the Nepal Himalayas (Philadephia: University of Pennsylvania Press,
    ), p. .
. On experience as narrative see the important work by Oliver Davies, A
    Theology of Compassion: Metaphysics of Difference and the Renewal of Tradition
    (London: SCM Press, ), pp. –.
. Csordas, ‘Introduction’, p. .
. Drew Leder, The Absent Body (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ),
    p. ; cited by Csordas, ‘Introduction’, p. .
. Geoffrey Samuel, Civilized Shamans: Buddhism and Tibetan Societies
    (Washington DC and London: Smithsonian Institution Press, ), p. .
. On my understanding of ritual (which draws on Rappaport), see The Ascetic
    Self, pp. –.
. Paul Grifﬁths, Religious Reading: The Place of Reading in the Practice of
    Religion (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. , –.
. Granoff, ‘Other People’s Rituals’.
. RA, vol. III, supplement .–.
. My use of the terms ‘image’, ‘icon’, ‘representation’ and ‘metaphor’ are not
    being used here in a technical sense, although the Sanskrit equivalents of
    ‘icon’ or ‘image’, namely m‚rti, bimba, vigraha and so on share the sense of
    the term ‘icon’ of participation and sharing in. In this sense my use of ‘icon’
    is quite distinct from Peirce.
. Stephan Beyer, The Cult of T®r®: Magic and Ritual in Tibet (Berkeley:
    California University Press, ), pp. –.
. G. Oberhammer, ‘Beobachtungen zur “Offenbarungsgeschicte” der
    Paramasam. hit®’, in G. Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II:
    Miscellanea to the Phenomenon of Tantras (Vienna: Der Österreichischen
    Akademie der Wissenschaften, ), pp. –.


                                 Chapter 2
 . On this, see A. MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions of Moral Enquiry:
    Encyclopedia, Genealogy and Tradition (Notre Dame: University of Notre
    Dame Press, ), pp. –.
 . Alexis Sanderson, ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir’, in
    Steven Lukes, Michael Carrithers, and Steven Collins (ed.), The Category of
    the Person (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
 . Ronald M. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, A Social History of the
    Tantric Movement (New York: Columbia University Press, ), p. .
 . Ibid., p. .
 . B. Stein, Peasant State and Society in Medieval South India (Delhi: Oxford
    University Press, ), pp. –.
                                    Notes                                   

 . S. Gupta and R. Gombrich, ‘Kings, Power and the Goddess’, South Asia
    Research / (), pp. –.
 . Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, p. . See also David N. Lorenzen,
    K®p®likas and K®l®mukhas: Two Lost ˆaivite Sects, nd edn (Delhi: MLBD,
    ), pp. –, who documents epigraphic evidence for the royal patron-
    age of groups linked to the P®˜upatas.
 . Romila Thapar, public lecture, University of Virginia, April .
 . Mark Dyczkowski, The Canon of the ˆaiv®gama and the Kubjik® Tantras of
    the Western Kaula Tradition (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
. Wilhelm Halbfass, India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding (Albany NY:
    SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
. These three are somewhat paraphrasing MacIntyre but they convey his
    general point. MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions, pp. –.
. Sanderson, ‘Purity and Power’, p. , citing reference to MTPVrt pp.
    –.
. MacIntyre, Three Rival Versions, p. .
. Charles Malamoud, ‘Semantics and Rhetoric in the Hindu Hierarchy of the
    “Aims of Man”’, in Cooking the World: Ritual and Thought in Ancient India,
    trans. D. White (Delhi: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –.
. J. Duncan and M. Derrett, Bharuci’s Commentary on the Manusmrti (the
    Manu-sastra-vivarana, books –), text, translation and notes, vol.  (Wies-
    baden: Franz Steiner, ), p. .
. Werner F. Menski, Hindu Law: Beyond Tradition and Modernity (Delhi and
    Oxford: Oxford University Press, ).
. J. Duncan M. Derrett, ‘A Juridical Fabrication of Early British India: The
    Mah®nirv®n. a-Tantra’, Essays in Classical and Modern Hindu Law, vol. ,
    Consequences of the Intellectual Exchange with Foreign Powers (Leiden: Brill,
    ), pp. –.
. Gudrun Bühnemann, ‘On Pura˜caran. a: Kul®rn. avatantra, Chapter ’, in
    Teun Goudriaan (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism (Albany NY:
    SUNY Press, ), verse , pp.  and .
. JS ..
. E.g. Wendy Doniger, ‘The Body in Hindu Texts’, in Sarah Coakley (ed.),
    Religion and the Body (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp.
    –.
. Richard Roberts, ‘Religion and the Body in Comparative Perspective’,
    Religion  (), pp. –; p. .
. Manu .–, cited by Doniger, ‘The Body in Hindu Texts’, pp. –.
. Manu .–; Derrett, Bharuci’s Commentary, p. .
. Patrick Olivelle, The §˜rama System: The History and Hermeneutics of a
    Religious Institution (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –.
. The relationship between Brahmanical values and renunciate values is, of
    course, a huge topic. Broadly speaking, on the one hand Dumont has argued
    for the divergence of the two ideologies, while on the other Heesterman
    has argued for their proximity. (For a brief summary of the debate, see my
    Introduction to Hinduism (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ),
    pp. –).
                         The Tantric Body

. Yajñavalkya-smr. ti .– on morning ablution rituals and so on.
    Yajñavalkyasmr. ti with the commentary of Vijñ®ne˜vara called the M¬taksara,
    Book , trans. Rai Bahadur Srisa Chandra Vidy®rn. ava (Allahabad: P®n. ini
    Ofﬁce, Bhuvane˜wari A˜rama, ).
. Ludo Rocher, J¬m‚tav®hana’s D®yabh®ga: The Hindu Law of Inheritance in
    Bengal (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –. Hindu law is
    not equal in this respect. Duncan J. Derrett, Studies in Hindu Law (Turin:
    Indologica Taurinensia, ), p. .
. Rocher, J¬m‚tav®hana’s D®yabh®ga, pp. , .
. Manu .–. See Julia Leslie, The Perfect Wife: The Orthodox Hindu
    Woman According to the Str¬dharma-paddhati of Tryambakayajvan (Oxford:
    Oxford University Press, ), pp. –.
. Manu . . See Doniger, ‘The Body in Hindu Texts’, pp. –.
. P.V. Kane, History of Dharma˜®stra, vol.  (Poona: Bhandarkar Oriental
    Research Institute, ) p. .
. K®ma S‚tra .. Alain Danielou, The Complete K®ma S‚tra: The First
    Unabridged Modern Translation of the Classic Indian Text (Rochester NY:
    Park Street Press, ).
. E.g. Arth. ..–; ..–.
. In a European context the classic here is, of course, E.H. Kanotorowicz, The
    King’s Two Bodies (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ).
. Arth. .. R.P. Kangle, The Kautilya Artha˜®stra (University of Bombay, nd
    ed., ). See Kane, History of Dharma˜®stra, pp. –.
. J¬v®nanda ˆukran¬tis®ra .–. Reference from Kane, History of
    Dharma˜®stra, p. . For full textual references to the seven elements, see
    ibid., p. .
. Richard A. Shweder and Edmund Bourne, ‘Does the Concept of Person Vary
    Cross-culturally?’, in R A Shweder and R LeVine (eds), Culture Theory:
    Essays on Mind, Self and Emotions (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press,
    ), p. .
. Puru◊a Sukta R. g-veda ..
. Manu . –.
. Arth. ..: r®j® rajyamiti prakr. tisam. k◊epaΩ.
. Arth. ..–... The vices are listed as k®ma-krodha-lobha-m®na-mada-
    har◊a.
. Manu .–, ..
. Manu .–. For a discussion and references, see Kane, History of Dharma-
    ˜®stra, pp. –.
. McKim Marriott, ‘Hindu Transaction, Diversity without Dualism’, in
    Bruce Kapferer (ed.), Transaction and Meaning (Philadelphia: Institute for
    the Study of Human Issues, ), pp. –.
. Arth. ...
. E.g. Gloria Goodwin Raheja, Poison in the Gift: Ritual, Prestation and the
    Dominant Caste in an Indian Village (Chicago: University of Chicago Press,
    ), pp. , –, –; Arjun Appadurai ‘Is Homo Hierarchicus?’,
    review article, American Ethnologist  (), pp. –; ‘Putting Hierarchy
    in Its Place’, in G. Marcus (ed.), Rereading Cultural Anthropology (Durham
                                     Notes                                     

    NC: Duke University Press, ). See also R. Inden, Imagining India
    (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –. A. Beteille, ‘Reply to Dumont’,
    Current Anthropology  (), pp. –; Pauline Kolenda, ‘Seven Kinds
    of Hierarchy in Homo Hierarchicus’, Journal of Asian Studies  (),
    pp. –. For a good summary of the debates and positions, see Steven
    M. Parish, Hierarchy and Its Discontents (Philadelphia: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, ), pp. –.
. F.A. Marglin, The Wives of the God King: The Rituals of the Devad®sis of Puri
    (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp. –.
. Raheja, Poison in the Gift, especially pp. –.
. Michael Witzel, ‘The Vedas and Upani◊ads’, in G. Flood (ed.), The Blackwell
    Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –; pp. –.
. R.C. Zaehner, Hinduism (Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp.
    –.
. Simon Brodbeck, ‘Asakta Karma in the Bhagavad G¬t®’, Ph.D. thesis
    (London: SOAS, ).


                                  Chapter 3
 . NJ , p. .
 . Bhaﬂﬂa, AD. Alexis Sanderson, ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of
    Kashmir’, in Micheal Carrithers, Steven Collins, and Steven Lukes (eds),
    The Category of the Person: Anthropology, Philosophy, History (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –; p.  n.
 . Gerhard Oberhammer, ‘Bemerkungen zum Phänomen religiöser Tradition’,
    in G. Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism: Vedism and Hinduism (Vienna:
    Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, ), pp. –; p. .
 . E.g. MVT .; KirT. .c-.
 . E.g. RA vol. I, vidy®p®da chapter .
 . R.J.S. Inden, ‘Imperial Pur®n. as: Kashmir as Vai◊n. ava Center of Words’, in
    R.J.S. Inden, Jonathan Walters and Daud Ali, Querying the Medieval: Texts
    and the History of Practices in South Asia (Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    ), pp. –; p. .
 . Inden, ‘Introduction: From Philological to Dialogical Texts’, in Inden et al.,
    Querying the Medieval, pp. –; p. .
 . Francis X. Clooney, ‘Why the Veda has No Author: Language as Ritual
    in Early M¬m®m. s® and Post-Modern Theology’, Journal of the American
    Academy of Religion / (), pp. –; p. .
 . NJ p. .
. NJ p. ; Sanskrit text pp. –.
. NJ pp. –.
. AD, p. : aho bat®p‚rvam idam tapaΩ.
. AD p. : viplavate varn. ®˜ramasam®c®raΩ. See also NJ, pp. –.
. Although Jayantha praises the king, this was not a universal sentiment
    among intellectuals of the time. Kalhan. a, for example, is scornful of ˆan. ka-
    ravarman’s ignorance of Sanskrit. Cited by D.H.H. Ingalls, ‘Introduction’,
                         The Tantric Body

    in Ingalls et al. (eds), The Dhvany®locana of §nandavardhana with the Locana
    of Abhinavagupta (Cambridge: Harvard University Press, ), p. .
. AD, pp. –; NJ, p. .
. Mark Dyczkowski, The Canon of the ˆaiv®gama and the Kubjik® Tantras of
    the Western Kaula Tradition (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), p. .
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, in S. Sutherland,
    L. Houlden, P. Clarke, and F. Hardy (eds), The World’s Religions (London:
    Routledge, ), pp. –.
. AG, p. .
. AG, pp. –.
. Dennis Hudson, ‘V®sudeva Kr. ◊n. a in Theology and Architecture: A
    Background to ˆr¬vai◊n. avism’, Journal of Vai◊n. ava Studies / (), pp.
    –.
. G. Colas, ‘Sectarian Divisions According to the Vaikh®nas®gama’, in T.
    Goudriaan (ed.), Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism (Leiden: Brill, ), p.
    .
. Detailed textual work and translation has been done by others. For
    example: H. Dan Smith, A Descriptive Bibliography of the Printed Texts
    of the Pañcaratr®gama (Baroda: Oriental Institute: -); Sanjukta
    Gupta, The Laksm® Tantra (Leiden: Brill, ); Marion Rastelli,
    Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen der Jayakhyasamhita (Vienna:
    Österreichen Akademie der Wissenschaften, ); Andreas Bock-Raming,
    ‘Untersuchungen zur Gottesvortstellung in der äleren Anonymliteratur des
    P®ñcar®tra’, Beiträge zur Indologie  (Wiesbaden: Harraossowitz, );
    Gérard Colas, Visnu, ses images et ses feux: les métamorphoses du dieu chez les
    vaikhanasa (Paris: Presses de l’Ecole Française d’Extrême-Orient, ).
. See Dan Smith, ‘The Three Gems of the P®ñcar®tra Canon: A Critical
    Appraisal’, Studies in the History of Religions, supplement to Numen  (),
    pp. –. On the contents of the texts, see Otto Schrader, Introduction to
    the P®ñcar®tra and the Ahirbudhnya Sam. hit® (Madras: Adyar Library, 
    []), pp. –.
. This complexity is becoming clear, especially through the work of the
    Oxford scholars Alexis Sanderson and his students (such as D. Goodall,
    J. Todzok, A. Watson, S. Vasudev, J. Hanneder and others), by scholars in
    Paris and Pondicherry (such as André Padoux, Hélène Brunner, N.R. Bhatt)
    and in Rome (especially Raffaela Torella).
. See Robert Mayer, A Scripture of the Ancient Tantra Collection: The Phur-
    pa bcu-gnyis (Oxford: Kiscadale Publications, ), pp. –. Mayer
    points to the parallels between the Buddhist and ˆaiva material here,
    particularly texts that have yet to have wider public dissemination such as
    the Jayadrathay®mala researched by Alexis Sanderson.
. Jürgen Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation: M®lin¬˜loka-
    v®rttika I, – (Groningen: Egbert Forsten, ), p. . Also see Alexis
    Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the M®lin¬vijayottaratantra’, in T. Goudriaan
    (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism (Albany NY: SUNY Press,
    ), pp. –; p.  n.
. Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the M®lin¬vijayottara’, pp. –.
                                    Notes                                    

. MVT vart. –; Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation, pp.
    –.
. For the twenty-eight dualist §gamas, see Dominic Goodall (ed. and trans.),
    Bhaﬂﬂa R®makan. ﬂha’s Commentary on the Kiran. atanra, vol.  (Pondicherry:
    Institut Français d’Indologie, ) Appendix III, pp. –.
. Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation, p. , quoting
    Abhinavagupta’s TA .cd–ab.
. Given by H. Brunner ‘Les Membres de ˆiva’, Etudes Asiatiques /
    (), pp. –; p. . Cited by Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy
    of Revelation, p. .
. I have derived this list, which is a fusion of two sets of identiﬁcation, from
    those given by Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation, pp.
    –.
. Ibid., p. .
. Again, the list is derived from Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of
    Revelation, p. . Also see Dyczkowski, The Canon of the ˆaiv®gama, pp.
    –.
. Hanneder, Abhinavagupa’s Philosophy of Revelation, p. .
. Ibid., p. .
. TA ..
. TA .–. Verse  repeated at c-b.
. TA .– and commentary.
. TA ..
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, p. .
. TA .–. –, translated by Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the
    M®lin¬vijayottara’, p. .
. MVT .. For an exposition of the text and its place in ˆaiva revelation,
    along with an exposition and translation of Abhinavagupta’s commentary,
    see Hanneder, Abhinavagupta’s Philosophy of Revelation.
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’. See also Dyczkowski, The
    Canon of the ˆaiv®gama, pp. –.
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, p. ; Dyczkowski The
    Canon of the ˆaiv®gama, pp. –; Flood, ‘The ˆaiva Traditions’, in The
    Blackwell Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –; pp.
    –.
. Ronald M. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the
    Tantric Movement (New York: Columbia University Press, ), pp.
    –.
. Manu ..
. David N. Lorenzen, The K®p®likas and K®l®mukhas: Two Lost ˆaivite Sects
    (Delhi: MLBD, nd edn,  []), pp. –. Diana Eck, Banares, City
    of Light (London: Routledge, ), p. . There are different versions
    of this myth. In the Skanda Pur®n. a, chapter , during a quarrel between
    Brahm® and Sacriﬁce about dominance, Veda interferes declaring Mah®deva
    to the source of all (including Brahm® and Sacriﬁce). A great sound arises
    and a disc, like the sun. Brahm® falls to earth and a ﬁfth head issues above
    his other four to behold the disc. Mah®deva then cuts off the head with his
                         The Tantric Body

    thumbnail and Brahm® realises his greatness and praises him. R. Adriansen,
    H.T. Bakker, and H. Isaacson The Skanda Pur®n. a volume , Critically Edited
    with a Prolegomena and English Synopsis (Groningen: Egbert Forsten, ),
    .–.
. Sanderson, ‘Purity and Power among the Brahmans of Kashmir’ p. . To
    quote Sanderson’s highly evocative description: ‘Smeared with the ashes of
    funeral pyres, wearing ornaments of human bone, the initiate would carry
                                                                    .
    in one hand a cranial begging-bowl and in the other a khaﬂv®n ga, trident-
    topped staff on which was ﬁxed beneath the prongs a human skull adorned
    with a banner of blood-stained cloth. Having thus taken on the appearance
    of the ferocious deities of his cult, he roamed about seeking to call forth
    these gods and their retinues in apocalyptic vision thereby to assimilate
    their superhuman identities and powers.’ On the K®p®likas, see Lorenzen,
    The K®p®likas and K®l®mukhas, pp. –; Dyczkowski, The Canon of the
    ˆaiv®gama, pp. –. On modern Aghor¬s, see J.P. Parry, Death in Benares
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
. André Padoux, Le Coeur de la Yogin¬: Yogin¬hr. daya avec le commentaire
    D¬pik® d’Amr. ®nanda (Paris: de Boccard, ), pp. –; Dyczkowski, The
    Canon of the ˆaiv®gama, pp. –.
. On the ˆr¬vidy®, see Douglas Brooks, The Secret of the Three Cities (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, ).
. Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the M®lin¬vijayottaratantra’, p.  n.
. E.g. Abinavagupta’s commentary on ¡˜varapratyabhijñ®vimar˜in¬, Jñ®n®dhik-
    ®ra V.. See David Peter Lawrence, Rediscovering God with Transcendental
    Argument: A Contemporary Interpretation of Monisitic Kashmiri ˆaiva
    Philosophy (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), especially on the relation
    between the Pratyabhijñ® and Buddhism, pp. –.
. KT, p. .
. KT, p. .
. KT, p. .
. Sat ..
. MTP .–, c-b. Cf. RA Vidy®p®da .–.
. SardhVrt. .ab.
. MVT .–.
. JS .–.
. Jaideva Singh, Abhinavagupta: A Trident of Wisdom (Delhi: MLBD, ), p.
    . See Natalia Isayeva, From Early Ved®nta to Kashmir Shaivism: Gaudapda,
    Bhartrhati, and Abhinavagupta (Delhi: ˆr¬ Satguru,  []), p. .
. Sardh. .ab: n®d®khyam. yatparam. b¬jam. sarvabh‚◊vavasthitam.
. Mrg ..
. PH s‚tra  plus auto-commentary.
. TA ..
. PH s‚tra , commentary.
. Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the M®lin¬vijayottara’, pp. –.
. Ibid., p. .
. Ibid., p. .
. ¡˜varakr. ◊n. a, S®m. khya-k®rik®s ; ; . Summarised by Karl H. Potter
                                     Notes                                     

    and G. Larson in G.J. Larson and Ram Shankar Bhattacharya (eds),
    Encyclopedia of Indian Philosophies vol. IV S®m. khya, a Dualist Tradition in
    Indian Philosophy (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ), pp. ,
    –.


                                  Chapter 4
 . For a useful overview, see ‘Civilization, concept of ’, in Neil J. Smelser and
    Paul B. Baltes (editors in chief), International Encyclopaedia of the Social and
    Behavioural Sciences (Oxford: Elsevier, ), vol. , pp. –.
 . Wilhelm Halbfass, India and Europe: An Essay in Understanding (Albany NY:
    SUNY Press, ), p. .
 . Sheldon Pollock, ‘The Sanskrit Cosmopolis, – : Trasculturation,
    Vernacularization, and the Question of Ideology’, in Jan E.M. Houben (ed.),
    Ideology and Status of Sanskrit: Contributions to the History of the Sanskrit
    Language (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –.
 . Sheldon Pollock, ‘The Cosmopolitan Vernacular’, p. . Journal of Asian
    Studies vol. , , pp. –.
 . Ibid., pp. –.
 . Ibid., pp. –.
 . Rich Freeman, ‘The Literature of Hinduism in Malayalam’, in Gavin Flood
    (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp.
    –.
 . David White, The Kiss of the Yogin¬: ‘Tantric Sex’ in its South Asian Contexts
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), p. .
 . R. Freeman, ‘Formalised Possession Among the Tantris and Teyyams of
    Malabar’, South Asia Research / (), pp. –.
. Bruno Dagens, Mayamata. Traité Sanskrit d’architecture, critical edi-
    tion, translation and notes, Parts  and  (Pondicherry: Institut Français
    d’Indologie,  and ). See also B. Dagens, Les Enseignements architec-
    turaux de l’Ajit®gama et du Raurav®gama, Etudes sur les ®gama ˜ivaites, vol.
     (Pondicherry: Institut Français d’Indologie, ).
. Marie-Luce Barazer-Billoret, Bruno Dagens and Vincent Lefevre (eds),
    D¬pt®gama, vol. , chs – (Pondichéry: Institut Français d’Indologie,
    ).
. ˆilpaprak®˜a: A Medieval Orissan Sanskrit Text on Temple Architecture by
    R®macadra Kaul®c®ra, trans. Alica Boner and Sad®˜iva Rath ˆarma (Leiden:
    Brill, ).
. RAot, chs  to . Bhatt provides a lucid description in his introduction to
    the text, pp. vii–xlv.
. Ronald Inden, Imagining India (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. , –.
. R. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism: A Social History of the Tantric
    Movement (New York: Columbia University Press, ), p. . On these
    developments generally, see ibid., pp. –.
. Harald Tambs-Lynche, Power, Proﬁt, and Poetry: Traditional Society in
    Kathiawar, Western India (Delhi: Manohar, ), p. .
                          The Tantric Body

. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, p. .
. T. Goudriaan and S. Gupta, Hindu Tantric and ˆ®kta Literature in Sanskrit,
    History of Indian Literature, vol. II (Wiesbaden: Otto Harrassowitz, ),
    p. . Mark S.G. Dyczkowski, The Canon of the ˆaiv®gama and the Kubjik®
    Tantras of the Western Kaula Tradition (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ),
    p. . On the importance of a particular tantric text in Southeast Asia,
    see Max Nihom, Studies in Indian and Indo-Indonesian Tantrism: The
    Kuñjarakarn. adharmakathana and the Yogatantra, de Nobili Research Library
    vol.  (Vienna: Institute of Indology, ). On inscriptions as evidence of
    the presence of Hindu traditions in Cambodia, see Richard Salomon, Indian
    Epigraphy: A Guide to the Study of Inscriptions in Sanskrit, Prakrit, and
    Other Indo-§ryan Languages (New York and Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, ), pp. –. See also O.W. Wolters, ‘Khmer “Hinduism” in the
    Seventh Century’, in R.B. Smith and W. Watson (eds), Early South East
    Asia: Essays in Archaeology, History and Historical Geography (New York:
    Oxford University Press, ).
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’, in Ann-Marie Blondeau
    and Kristofer Schipper (eds), Essais sur le rituel, vol. III (Louvain and Paris:
    Peeters, ), pp. –; p. .
. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, p. .
. A.M. Hocart, Kings and Councillors: An Essay in the Comparative Anatomy
    of Human Society, ed. Rodney Needham (Chicago: University of Chicago
    Press,  []), pp. , –. See also Louis Dumont, ‘La conception
    de la royauté dans l’Inde ancienne’, Contributions to Indian Sociology 
    (), pp. –. Also M. Biardeau, ‘The Salvation of the King in the
    Mah®bh®rata’, Contributions to Indian Sociology  (), pp. –.
. Inden, Imagining India, p. .
. Gérard Tofﬂin, Le Palais et le Temple, la function royale das la vallée du Nepal
    (Paris: CNRS, ), p. .
. Burton Stein, Peasant, State and Society in Medieval South India (Delhi:
    Oxford University Press, ), pp. , .
. C.J. Fuller, The Camphor Flame: Popular Hinduism and Society in India
    (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ), pp. –.
. Manu ..
. Tofﬂin, Le Palais et le Temple, p. .
. Manu .–.
. Freda Matchet, ‘The Pur®n. as’, in Flood (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to
    Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –; pp. –.
. Inden, ‘Imperial Pur®n. as’, pp. –.
. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, pp. –.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, pp. –.
. R.C. Hazra, Studies in the Pur®n. ic Records on Hindu Rites and Customs, nd
    edn (Delhi: MLBD, ). Particularly the Agni-pur®n. a, see Marie-Thérèse
    de Mallmann, Les Enseignements Iconographiques de l’Agni Pur®n. a (Paris:
    Presses Universitaires de France, ), pp. , –.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. . This idea of the transmission of divine
    power to king and people through sex is ancient in India. The vedic horse
                                     Notes                                    

    sacriﬁce entailed the king symbolically sleeping with the dead stallion, there-
    by ensuring the ﬂow of divine power to the people. See Wendy O’Flaherty,
    Women, Androgynes and Other Mythical Beasts (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, ), p. .
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. Tofﬂin, Le Palais et le Temple, pp. , ; White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. Davidson, Indian Esoteric Buddhism, pp. –. See also White, Kiss of the
    Yogin¬, pp. –.
. JS .–.
. Sanjukta Gupta and Richard Gombrich, ‘Kings, Powers and the Goddess’,
    South Asia Research / (), pp. –.
. Tofﬂin, Palais et temple, pp. –. Tofﬂin documents in some detail the
    case of King Pratap Malla, who stepped down in . The king derives his
    power especially from the tantric Goddess Taleju (p. ).
. NeT .–, .–, .–. References from Brunner, ‘Un Tantra du
    Nord: le Netra Tantra’, Bulletin de l’École Française d’Extrême-Orient 
    (), pp. -; pp. , , –.
. ISG Mantrap®da ..: b®laΩ kum®ro r®j® ca vr. ddhaΩ svargata eva ca/
    bhuktir y®nam. ca r®jyam. ca karma suptis tath® mr. tiΩ.
. ISG Mantrap®da ... Such magical conceptions have a long pedigree
    in Sanskrit literature going back to the Br®hman. as.
. The classic study is, of course, E.H. Kantorowicz, The King’s Two Bodies
    (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ).
. Tofﬂin, Le palais et le temple. On the centrality of the king in Hindu ritual
    generally, see Chris Fuller, The Camphor Flame: Popular Hinduism and
    Society in India (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ), pp.
    –.
. RAot, chapters – on different kinds of temples, chapter  on the rites of
    installation, chapters – on the installation of speciﬁc deities. Also Ajit,
    chapters , , –; ISG Kriy®p®da –; starting from the groundplan
    and working out, the most important text of tantric architecture is the SP
    .–. For details on the Mayamata and SP, see notes  and . For an
    interesting discussion of the k®makal® in the text, see White, Kiss of the
    Yogin¬, pp. –. On ˆ®kta temples and m®tr. k® imagery in Orissa, see K.S.
    Behera and Thomas Donaldson, Sculpture Masterpieces from Orissa (New
    Delhi: Aryan Books, ), pp. , –.
. RA Kriy®p®da, chapters ,  and  respectively. There is some variation
    in the §gamas, but in the RA the dv®rap®las are Nandin and K®la in the
                                                              .
    east, Dan. ¥in and Mun. ¥in in the south, Vijaya and Bhr. ngi to the west, and
    Gopati and Ananta to the north. RA kriy®p®da .–.
. N.P. Unni, ‘Introduction’, The Tantrasamuccaya of N®r®yan. a with the
                                 .
    commentary vimar˜in¬ of ˆan kara, ed. M.T. Gan. apati ˆ®str¬ with an elabo-
    rate introduction by N.P. Unni (Delhi: Nag Publishers), pp. –; pp.
    –. For a brief, clear, internal description of Kerala temple worship see
    D.Appukuyttain Nair, ‘ˆiva Temple Worship in Kerala’, in S.S. Janaki (ed.),
    ˆiva Temple and Temple Rituals (Madras: Kupuswami Research Institute,
    ), pp. –. We await Rich Freeman’s forthcoming study of the Kerala
                         The Tantric Body

    Tantr®gama tradition. On the Kerala ‘tantric’ Goddess Bhagavat¬ see Sarah
    Caldwell, Oh Terrifying Mother: Sexuality, Violence, and the Worship of the
    Goddess K®l¬ (New Delhi and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ).
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, pp. –.
. On theology practised at Cidamabaram, especially Um®pati’s work, see
    David Smith, The Dance of ˆiva: Religion, Art, and Poetry in South India
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
. KT ..
. Dermot Killingley, ‘Enjoying the World: Desire (k®ma) and the Bhagavad-
    g¬t®’, in Julius Lipner (ed.), The Fruits of Our Desiring: An Inquiry into the
    Ethics of the Bhagavadg¬t® for Our Times (Calgary: Bayeux, ), pp. –;
    p. .
. E.g. Dan. ¥in, The Tale of Ten Princes; Charles Malamoud, ‘Seduction in an
    Indian Light’, in Cooking the World, Ritual and Thought in Ancient India,
    trans. David White (New Delhi and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ),
    pp. –.
. Louis Dumont, ‘World Renunciation in Indian Religions’, in Homo
    Hierarchicus: The Caste System and Its Implications, revised English edition
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), pp. –.
. Also a practice witnessed in Tibetan Buddhist texts. David Germano,
    personal communication, .
. C.S. George, The Can. ¥amah®ro◊an. atantra, chs I–VIII. Sanskrit and Tibetan
    texts with English translation (New Haven CT: Oriental Society, ), pp.
    , .
. Kaul, ..
. Richard A. Darmon, ‘Vajrol¬ mudr®. La retention séminale chez les yogis
    v®m®c®r¬’, in Véronique Boullier and Gilles Tarabout (eds), Images du corps
    dans le monde hindou (Paris: CNRS, ), pp. –. Also attested in
    Buddhist Tibetan texts (David Germano, personal communication, ).
. KT .ab.
. D.D. Shulman, Tamil Temple Myths: Sacriﬁce and Divine Marriage in the
    South Indian ˆaiva Tradition (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press,
    ), pp. –. Cited by J.P. Parry, Death in Benares (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), p. .
. Friedhelm Hardy, The Religious Culture of India: Power, Love, and Wisdom
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), p. .
. Ibid., pp. –.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. Devagana Desai, Erotic Sculpture of India: A Socio-Historical Study (New
    Delhi: McGraw Hill, ), pp. , –.
. Discussed in White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, pp. –.
. SP .–.
. SP ..
. KT .–, trans. Alexis Sanderson, cited in R.C. Zaehner, Our Savage
    God (London: Collins, ), pp. –. There are also ‘orgistic’ representa-
    tions, including drinking scenes and the drinking of female sexual ﬂuids
    (rajap®na), depicted on temple walls, for example in Orissa. Behera and
                                    Notes                                    

    Donaldson, Sculpture Masterpieces from Orissa, p. –. See White, Kiss
    of the Yogin¬, p. .
. Gavin Flood, ‘Techniques of Body and Desire’, Religion  (), pp.
    –.
. R. Freeman, ‘The Teyyam Tradition of Kerala’, in Flood (ed.), The Blackwell
    Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –; p. .
. Again, see Freeman’s important publications here. I do not have space to
    discuss his thesis of ritual possession as the model for other forms of reli-
    gious formation in South Asia but this is clearly highly germane to all work
    in this area. My reading of his work would be to see possession in terms
    of entextualisation. See also Frederick Smith, Friendly Acquisitions, Hostile
    Takeovers: Deity and Spirit Possession in South Asian Civilization (Berkeley:
    University of California Press, forthcoming).
. Freeman, ‘The Teyyam Tradition of Kerala’, p. .
. Ibid., p. .
. Some work on intertextuality has been done here on the interconnec-
    tions between the ISG and Tantras®ra-sam. graha. See Gudrun Bühnemann,
    ‘Buddhist Deities and Mantras in the Hindu Tantras: II, The Tantra-
    s®rasam. graha and the ¡˜®na˜ivagurudevapadhati’, Indo-Iranian Journal 
    (), pp. –.
. NT . and commentary pp. –.
. NT .c–. ‘If an aggrieved man should be somewhat afﬂicted by them
    [the terrible vin®yakas] then he should worship Vighne˜a, the chief Vin®yaka.
    He should worship with the practice of visualisation and offerings from an-
    other Tantra, with many kinds of sweetmeats, various greedy offerings, with
    strong drink, meat, and the perfume of red ﬂowers.’ yadi tair vighnitaΩ ka˜cid
    abhibh‚to bhaven naraΩ// tatr®dhidaivatam. p‚jyo vighne˜as tu vin®yakaΩ/
    anyatantropac®ren. a dhy®nayogena p‚jayet// modakair vividhai˜ citrair
    valibhir ghasmarais tath®/ bh‚rimadyais tath® m®m. sairraktapu◊pavilepanaiΩ.
. NT . –: ‘Whenever the boundless mothers, situated near, desire
    to destroy (one), then one should worship the eternal great mothers, the
    seven mothers Br®hm¬, M®he˜var¬, kaum®r¬, vai◊n. av¬, V®r®h¬, Indr®n. ¬, and
    C®mun. ¥®.’ Yad® hy anant®s tatrasth® m®taraΩ sam. nidh®nataΩ/ jigh®m. santi
    tad® sadyo mah®m®tr. Ω prap‚jayet// br®hm¬ m®he˜var¬ caiva kaum®r¬ vai◊n. av¬
    tath®/ v®r®h¬ ca tathendr®n. ¬ c®mun. ¥® saptam®taraΩ.
. NT .c.
. Filliozat, Jean Le Kum®ratantra de R®van. a et les textes parallèles Indiens,
    Tibétains, Chinois, Cambodgien, et Arabe (Paris: Imprimerie Nationale, ),
    p. .
. Ibid., text pp. –; translation pp. –.
. Ibid., text p. ; translation p. .
. ISG Mantrap®da ..–. Cf. the description in the later ˆ®rad®tilaka-
    tantra, Gudrun Bühnemann, The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities, vol.
    II (Groningen: Egbert Forsten, ), pp. –.
. ISG Mantrap®da .. The chapter refers to itself as the ‘therapy for chil-
    dren of Kha¥gar®van. a’. Discussed in Filliozat, Le Kum®ratatra, pp. –.
. Filliozat, Le Kum®ratantra, pp. –. Teun Goudriaan points to two
                           The Tantric Body

     traditions of R®van. a in the Sanskrit sources, the one more familiar as
     the demon king, the other as a an exorcist deity, ‘Kha¥ga-R®van. a and his
     Worship in Balinese and Indian Tantric Sources’, Weiner Zeitschrift für die
     Kunde Südasiens  (), pp. –.
 . ISG Mantrap®da ..
 . TSG .–.
 . ISG Mantrap®da .. b-.
 . Kaul. .–.
 . ISG Mantrap®da .. –b.
 . TSG .–.
 . ISG Mantrap®da .. –b.
 . ISG Mantrap®da .. d.
 . ISG Mantrap®da .. –. hr. dayam. bhagavacchabdo ◊udr®˜agat® phacuta m
     andarakusuma◊aﬂpadavajratun. ¥a n¬l®ñjanasamaprabha idam. bh‚tam. hana vili-
     pantam. kha kha hum. phaﬂ ﬂhaﬂha/ anena m®◊akr. sarair j®pitv® grastat®¥an®t/
     tam. muñcanti grah®Ω svaikhyam. rudradhy®nena tat k◊an®t//// hr. day®nte
     bhagavate phave˜c®◊®˜a namaΩ k®sa˜a mahe˜var®ya bhramari bhr®maya s‚kari
     bhak◊aya ﬂhaﬂha/ m®◊®nnanena sam. mantrya bhak◊an. ®n muñcati grahaΩ/ namo
     bhagavate ◊udr®˜a mah®bhairava dev®ya nartaya mo¥aya balgaya kro¥aya
     bhr‚m. graham can. ¥a hum. phaﬂ ﬂhaﬂha/ bh‚tapretapi˜®c®diñ jap®dyair mocayen
     manuΩ//// t®ram. hr. dccan. ¥a˜abda˜ca krodharudr®ya d‚◊u pu◊u bh‚tasamaye
     ti◊ﬂha ﬂhaﬂha/ saptav®ram. japitvemam. ˜ikh®m. grastasya bandhayet/ grahas
     tu samaye ti◊ﬂhed vahniv®yupuram. punaΩ//// likhitv® bhasman® tasmin
     grastam. sam. sth®pya mantrataΩ/ anen®◊ﬂottara˜atam. japitv®mbho mukhe’sya
     vai//// prak◊ipec ca japan kruddho graha ®vi˜ya muñcati/ rajjv® japitay®nena
     stambham. badhudhv® sa badhyate//// pi◊ﬂapratikr. tim. kr. tv® tatr®v®hya tu
     graham/ pr®n. aprati◊ﬂh®m. kr. tv® tu k◊uren. ainam. vid®rayet//// chedayec ca
     tri˜‚lena marmasu k◊atajam. sravet/ et®vat® grahagrast®n na muñcati yad® tad®
     //// chinn®m. pratikr. tim. r®jiyukt®m. kun. ¥e juhotu ca/ sahasram. sa graho
     dagdhaΩ parityajya pal®yati////
 . ISG Mantrap®da ..ab; ..; ..–.
 . ISG Mantrap®da ..–.
 . ISG Mantrap®da ...
 . Freeman, ‘The Teyyam Tradition’, p. .
 . ISG Mantrap®da ..
 . David L. Haberman, Acting as a Way of Salvation: A Study of R®g®nuga
     Bhakti S®dhana (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ),
     pp. –, –.
. On the Sahajiyas, see S.N. Dasgupta, Obscure Religious Cults (Calcutta:
     Firma K. Mukhopadhyay,  []), pp. –; Edward Dimock, The
     Place of the Hidden Moon: Erotic Mysticism in the Vaishnavasahajiya Cult of
     Bengal (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), p. .


                                  Chapter 5
  . G. Oberhammer, ‘Beobachtungen zur “Offenbarungsgeschicte” der Parama-
     sam. hit®’, in G. Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II. Miscellanea to
                                      Notes                                     

    the Phenomenon of Tantras (Vienna: Der Österreichischen Akademie der
    Wissenschaften, ), pp. –; p. .
 . Natalia Isayeva, From Early Ved®nta to Kashmir Shaivism: Gaudapda,
    Bhartrhati, and Abhinavagupta (Delhi: ˆr¬ Satguru,  []), p. .
 . For an interesting account of cosmology in the Paramasam. hit® see
    Marzenna Czerniak-Droźdoźowicz, ‘Sr. ◊tikrama – Order of Creation in
    the Paramasam. hit®’, in G. Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II, pp.
    –.
 . Spand, pp. –, , . The passages quoted are JS .–, ., and
    .c-b.
 . For an excellent summary of P®ñcar®tra cosmology, see Otto Schrader,
    Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra and the Ahirbudhnya Sam. hit® (Madras: Adyar
    Library,  []), pp. –.
 . JS .–. All translations to the JS are my own, although there is a German
    translation of ﬁve chapters in M. Rastelli, Philosophisch–theologische
    Grundanschauungen der Jayakhyasamhita (Vienna: Österreichen Akademie der
    Wissenschaften, ), and also in Andreas Bock-Raming, Untersuchungen
    zur Gottesvorstellung in der älteren Anonymliteratur des P®ñcar®tra, Beiträge
    zur Indologie  (Weisbaden: Harrassowitz, ), pp. –. For an ex-
    tended discussion of cosmology in the Jay®khya, see pp. –.
 . These deities are known to the parallel, orthodox tradition of the Vaikh®nasa.
    See Gerard Colas, ‘History of Vai◊n. ava Traditions’, in Gavin Flood (ed.),
    The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell, ), pp. –;
    p. . G. Colas, Vi◊n. u, ses images et ses feux. Les métamorphoses du dieu chez
    les vaikh®nasa (Paris: de Boccard, ).
 . The term vy‚ha is from the Sanskrit root ‚h, ‘to remove’, and vi, ‘asunder’.
    Schrader speculates that the term refers to the pushing asunder of six
    qualities of God into three pairs (Introduction to the Pancaratra and the
    Ahirbudhnya Samhita, Madras: Adyar Library  [], p. ). However,
    the term may be derived from Buddhism, where its occurrence is earlier.
    The Sukh®vat¬-vy‚ha is an early Mah®y®na text about the manifestation of a
    pure Buddha land called the land of contentment. We must surely take vy‚ha
    here to mean something like appearance or manifestation, as the tat puru◊a
    compound surely cannot mean the shoving away of the pure land. Rather it
    is suffering that is removed and the pure land takes its place. Indeed, there
    are dimensions to this text, its meditative and visionary dimensions, the idea
    of a happy place beyond the world, that echo the P®ñcar®tra idea of Vi◊n. u’s
    heaven (vaikun. ﬂha).
 . Schrader, Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra, pp. –, although since then there
    have, of course, been developments in locating the sources of the vy‚has.
    See Andreas Bock-Raming, Untersuchungen zur Gottesvorstellung in der
    äleren Anonymliteratur des P®ñcar®tra Beiträge zur Indologie  (Weisbaden:
    Harraossowitz, ). For a thorough account of the cosmology of the
    Jay®khya-sam. hit®, see Rastelli, Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen,
    pp. –.
. Bock-Raming shows remarkable early icons of the vy‚has and a pillar
    representing the tattva hierarchy. Bock-Raming, Untersuchungen zur
                          The Tantric Body

    Gottesvortstellung, Plates –.
. Ahirbudhnya Sam. hit® .c-. Quoted by Rastelli, Philosophisch-theologische
    Grundanschauungen, p. , n. Rastelli seems, reasonably, to suggest that
    the concept of the Puru◊a in the JS is not dissimilar to the kutasth® puru◊a
    of other texts. While the details of different texts vary, the principles remain
    constant.
. LT .–. See Schrader, Introduction, pp. –.
. See Schrader, Introduction, pp. –.
. See ibid., pp. –. On the origins of the vy‚ha ways of thinking in the
    Ch®ndogya Upani◊ad, see Bock-Raming, Untersuchungen zur Gottesvorstellung,
    p. .
. Although Schrader claims that the buddhi is the individual aspect of the
    cosmic mahat. Introduction, pp. –.
. It has even been rendered as ‘instinct’ by J. Pereira, Hindu Theology: Themes,
    Texts, and Structures (New York: Doubleday Image, ), p. . In his
    discussion of the term, Larson suggests that the psychoanalytic notion of
    the unconscious ‘might be somewhat helpful in describing the buddhi, in so
    far as it is our Western equivalent to a dimension of man which is not self-
    conscious but yet determines basic human strivings’. G. Larson, Classical
    S®m. khya: An Interpretation of Its History and Meaning (Delhi: MLBD,
    ), p. . One can see why scholars have arrived at this understanding
    as the buddhi contains the impulses that limit the self as the empirical expe-
    riencer. But these renderings do not appreciate fully enough the hierarchical
    nature of this cosmology, that limiting constraints are derived from a higher
    cosmic level.
. S®m. khya-k®rik® rd ®rya. These are found not only in the P®ñcar®tra but
    in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta also. See the Mrg. .–, –; ..
. See Gavin Flood, Body and Cosmology in Kashmir ˆaivism (San Francisco:
    Mellen Research University Press, ), pp. –.
. For a thorough account of this development in the JS, see Rastelli,
    Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen, pp. –.
. For a discussion of this, see Karl H. Potter, Presuppositions of India’s
    Philosophies (Westport: Greenwood Press, ), pp. –.
. Rastelli, Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen, pp. –, –.
. JS . a.
. JS . b-
. The material on the bh‚ta˜uddhi in this chapter recapitulates much of my
    article ‘The Puriﬁcation of the Body in Tantric Ritual Representation’,
    Indo-Iranian Journal  (), pp. –.
. See S. Gupta, ‘Yoga and Antaray®ga in P®ñcar®tra’, in Teun Goudriaan (ed),
    Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honour of André Padoux
    (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –; p. ; Gavin Flood, ‘Ritual,
    Cosmos and the Divine Body in the Jay®khyasam. hit®’, Wiener Zeitschrift für
    die Kunde Südasiens  (supplement) (), pp. –.
. See Alexis Sanderson, ‘Vajray®na: Origin and Function’, in Mettanando
    Bhikkhu et al. (eds), Buddhism in the Year  (Bangok: Dhammakaya
    Foundation, ), pp. –.
                                      Notes                                     

. Br. had®ran. yaka Upani◊ad .., in Patrick Olivelle (trans.), The Early
    Upani◊ads (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), p. .
. Cf. Puru◊a-s‚kta, R. g-veda .. For the Indo-European ancestry of the
    symbolic identiﬁcation of body and cosmos, see Bruce Lincoln, Myth, Cosmos
    and Society: Indo-European Themes of Creation and Destruction (Cambridge
    MA: Harvard University Press, ).
. Brian K. Smith, Classifying the Universe: The Ancient Indian Varn. a System
    and the Origins of Caste (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    ), pp. – and passim.
. Buddhaghosa, Visuddhimagga. .–; .–. Translated by Pe Maung
    Tin, The Path of Purity (London: P®li Text Society, ), pp. –,
    –.
. Majjhima-nik®ya .. Translated by I.B. Horner, The Middle Length Sayings
    vol.  (London: P®li Text Society, ). D¬gha-nik®ya .. Translated by
    T.W. and C.A.F. Rhys Davids, Dialogues of the Buddha, part  (London:
                                 .
    P®li Text Society, ). An guttara-nik®ya III..,. Translated by F.L.
    Woodward, The Book of Gradual Sayings vol.  (London: P®li Text Society,
    ).
. Although the actual sequence is as follows: earth, water, ﬁre, air, blue, yellow,
    red, white, light and space.
. For a discussion of the kasin. as, see H.V. Guenther, The Philosophy and
    Psychology of the Abhidharma (Berkeley CA and London: Shambala, ),
    pp. –. On early Buddhist meditation, see Lance Cousins, ‘Vittaka/
    Vitarka and Vic®ra: Stages of Sam®dhi in Buddhism and Yoga’, Indo-Iranian
    Journal  (), pp. –. Lance Cousins, ‘ˆamatha-y®na and vipassana-
    y®na’, in G. Dhammapala, R. Gombrich and K.R. Norman (eds), Buddhist
    Studies in Honour of Hammalava Saddhatissa (Nugegoda: University of
    Jayewardenepura, ), pp. –.
. KA .ff. The text follows the pattern of ˆaiva Siddh®nta worship with a
    system of kal®s, using thirty-one identiﬁed with the body (.).
. NT ..
. SSP, vol. , p. xxi.
. Bhut, pp. –. This text in the manuscript collection of the French
    Institute at Pondicherry follows the ˆaiva Siddh®nta model as articulated
    by Soma˜ambhu.
. See David White, The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), pp. , , –.
. See SSP vol. , pp. xii–xxii. André Padoux, V®c, the Concept of the Word in
    Selected Hindu Tantras, trans. J. Gontier (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ),
    pp. –.
. TatPrak ..
. Flood, ‘Ritual, Cosmos, and the Divine Body’, pp. –.
. See T. Goudriaan, ‘Vaikh®nasa Daily Worship’, Indo-Iranian Journal 
    (), pp. –; p. .
. G. Colas, ‘Sectarian Divisions According to the Vaikh®nas®gama’, in T.
    Goudriaan (ed.), Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism (Leiden: Brill, ),
    p. .
                          The Tantric Body

. See Gupta, ‘Yoga and Antaray®ga’, p. . There are some passages in the
    Sat (e.g. .f.; .–) that prescribe these rites without calling them
    brahmayajña etc.
. See SSP, vol. , pp. xxiv–xxvi.
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’, in Anne-Marie Blondeau
    (ed.), Essais sur le rituel, vol.  (Paris: Ecole Pratique des Haute Etudes, th
    section, ), pp. –.
. JS .–.
. This pattern is directly paralleled by the ˆaiva classiﬁcation of samayin,
    putraka, ®c®rya and s®dhaka. See H. Brunner, ‘Le S®dhaka, personnage
    oublié de l’Inde du Sud’, Journal Asiatique  (), pp. –. See also
    R. Davis, Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshipping Siva in Medieval
    India (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ), pp. –.
. Katherine K. Young, ‘Om, the Veda, and the Status of Women with Special
    Reference to ˆr¬vai◊n. avism’, in Laurie L. Patton (ed.), Jewels of Authority:
    Women and Textual Tradition in Hindu Law (Oxford: Oxford University
    Press, ), pp. –.
. For an English translation of this chapter see my ‘The Puriﬁcation of the
    Body’, in David White (ed.), Tantra in Practice (Princeton NJ: Princeton
    University Press, ), pp. –.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. JS ..
. The six qualities possessed by N®r®yan. a are jñ®na, ai˜varya, ˜akti, bala,
    v¬rya and tejas. See LT .–; Schrader, Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra,
    pp. –.
. JS .–.
. JS .a–.
. JS .–ab.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. This echoes the Ch®ndogya-upani◊ad .., which speaks of the space within
    the heart containing earth and sky, ﬁre and wind, sun and moon, and
    lightning and stars. Also .., where the deceased rises to the crown of the
    head and reaches the sun.
. JS .–.
. JS ..
. JS .a.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. JS .–.
. JS ..
. M. Monier-Williams, Sanskrit–English Dictionary (Oxford: Clarendon Press
    ), p. .
. JS .–. See the Appendix for a translation of this chapter on ny®sa.
                                     Notes                                     

. JS .–. Rastelli gives an extremely helpful list of the names of the man-
    tras and their corresponding body parts in the text, Philosophisch-theologische
    Grundanschauungen, pp. –.
. JS .c–.
. JS .c–b.
. JS .b–.
. JS .c–.
. JS .: aham. sa bhagav®n vi◊n. ur aham. n®r®yan. o hariΩ/ v®sudevo hyaham.
    vy®p¬ bh‚t®v®so nirañjanaΩ.
. M. Rastelli, ‘The ®sana According to the Parame˜varasam. hit® or A Method
    of Writing a Sam. hit®’, in G. Oberhammer and M. Rastelli (eds), Studies in
    Hinduism III: P®ñcar®tra and Vi˜i◊ﬂ®dvaita (Vienna: Der Österreichischen
    Akademi der Wissenschaften, ), pp. –.
. JS ; LT .–. For a lucid account of the inner worship in the JS, the
    visualisation that pervades the body, the construction of the throne, the
    inner worship of the deity along with the mantras, see Rastelli, Philosophisch-
    theologische Grundanschauungen, pp. –. Rastelli presents a helpful dia-
    gram of the visualisation (‘The ®sana according to the Paramesvaradamhita…’,
    p. .) See also Flood, ‘Ritual, Cosmos and the Divine Body’, pp. –;
    Sanjukta Gupta ‘Yoga and Anta y®ga in P®ñcar®tra’, and Sanjukta Gupta’s
    translation, The Lak◊m¬ Tantra (Leiden: Brill, ), ch. .
. Rastelli, Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen, pp. , .
. JS .–.
. JS .b.
. LT .–.
. JS, chapter . See A. Padoux, ‘Un rituel hindou du rosaire (Jay®khyasam. hit®,
    ch. )’, Journal Asiatique  (), pp. –.
. JS, chapter . See Gudrun Bühnemann, P‚j®: A Study in Sm®rta Ritual
    (Vienna: Publications of the de Noblili Research Library, ).


                                 Chapter 6
 . The JS is quoted by the Kashmiri Utpal®c®rya along with other P®ñcar®tra
    texts. See Otto Schrader, Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra (Madras: Adyar
    Library,  []), pp. –.
 . H. Brunner-Lachaux, ‘Introduction’, SSP, vol. , pp. xli–xlii.
 . The location of the ISG within the history of south Indian traditions is open
    to dispute, although it is likely to be from Kerala, as all the manuscripts from
    there are in Malayalam script, and the text is still used by some Nambuthiri
    families of the Taranallur clan in the Alwaye region. The text contains
    a synthesis of deities and traditions characteristic of Kerala Tantrism,
    with material on possession and exorcism, which are strong concerns of
    ‘folk’ religion in the Malabar region. A detailed study of the text, its inﬂu-
    ences, the history of the tradition and the inﬂuence of the ISG upon the
    Tantrasamuccaya would help to clarify its origins. This work has yet to be
    done.
                         The Tantric Body

 . Abhinavagupta, Ptlv a–. André Padoux (trans.), La Par®tr¬˜ik®laghuvr. tti
    de Abhinavagupta, Publications de l’Institut de Civilisation Indienne, fasc.
     (Paris: de Boccard, ). English translation by Paul Muller-Ortega,
    The Triadic Heart of ˆiva: Kaula Tantrism of Ahinavagupta in the Non-dual
    Shaivism of Kashmir (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
 . H. Brunner-Lachaux ‘Introduction’, Mr. gendr®gama: section des rites et sec-
    tion du comportement avec la vr. tti de Bhaﬂﬂa N®r®yan. akan. ﬂha (Pondicherry:
    Institut Français d’Indologie, ), pp. vii–xlvii; pp. xvii–xviii.
 . A number of works present this tripartite metaphysics. See SSP, vol. , pp.
    ix–xx; Jorg Gengnagel, M®y®, Puru◊a und ˆiva: Die dualistische Traditions
    des ˆivaismus nach Aghora˜iv®c®rya. Beiträge zur Kenntnis südasiatischer
    Sprachen und Literaturen  (Wiesbaden: Harrasowitz, ); Rohan
    A. Dunuwila, ˆaiva Siddh®nta Theology: A Context for Hindu–Christian
    Dialogue (Delhi: MLBD, ), pp. –.
 . On Bhojadeva and his dates, see Gengnagel, M®y®, Puru◊a und ˆiva, pp.
    –.
 . TatPrak .
 . Kum®radeva, in TatPrak, T®tparyad¬pik®, p. . On the ﬁve powers of ˆiva,
    see also Mrg Vidy®p®da, chapter .
. TatPrak ; Mrg Vidy®p®da .. KirT cd-ab.
. Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p. , note .
. TatPrak –.
. KirT . commentary. Goodall observes that the ﬁrst use of these terms
    is Sadyojyoti’s Sv®yambhuvavr. tti : and :. Furthermore he cites
    Sanderson as proposing that the source for the new terminology is in fact
    the non-Saiddh®ntika M®lin¬vijayottara. Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, pp. –,
    n.
. KirVrt. .; Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p. .
. On kal® see R®makan. ﬂha commentary on .ab. Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p.
    –. On the cosmic kal®s see André Padoux, V®c: The Concept of the
    Word in Selected Hindu Tantras, trans. J. Gontier (Albany NY: SUNY Press,
    ), pp. –, –.
. TatPrak. .
. MTP .; .; .ab.
. TatPrak ; vr. tti, p. . RA Vidy®p®da .–b.
. KirT .ef; Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p. .
. KirT .cd; Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p. .
. TatPrak .
. TatPrak ; vr. tti p. . See also KirT Vidy®p®da .cd-ab and Goodall’s
    explicatory note , Kiran. a-tantra, pp. –.
. TatPrak .
. E.g. the monist K◊emar®ja seems to regard Mantras, Mantre˜varas and
    Mantramantre˜varas as being higher than the Vijñ®nakal®s, whom he places
    above m®y® but below the Mantras. PH, p. f. He posits seven kinds of
    experient (pramatr. ), ˆiva, the three groups of Mantra Lords and then the
    three types of soul of the Siddh®nta (Vijñ®nakala, ˆ‚nyakala, Sakala).
. Mrg Vidy®p®da .cd.
                                     Notes                                     

. TatPrak ; T®tparyad¬pik®, p. .
. KirT .; Mrg vr. tti, Vidy®p®da .: the soul is the raison d’être for the
    universe.
. TatPrak .
. Mrg Vidy®p®da ..
. KT .cd-ab.
. E.g. MTP .d; RA Vidy®p®da .cd.
. Davis has called this ‘the oscillating universe’. He describes the process well,
    as one in which the universe ‘oscillates between moments of creation and
    destruction, evolution and involution, activity and quietude, expansion and
    contraction.’ R. Davis, Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshipping ˆiva
    in Medieval India (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ), p. .
. See Raffaela Torella, ‘The Kañcukas in the ˆaiva and Vai◊n. ava Tantric
    Tradition: A Few Considerations between Theology and Grammar’, in G.
    Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II: Miscellania to the Phenomenon of
    Tantras (Vienna: Der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, ),
    pp. –.
. TatPrak .
. KirT .cd; Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, p. .
. TatPrak ; T®tparyad¬pik®, p. .
. TatPrak –. For an account of the tattvas in the ˆaiva Siddh®nta, see
    Brunner-Lachaux, ‘Introduction’, SSP vol. , pp. xvi–xx. On the deﬁnition
    of m®y®, see Mrg .–.
. MTP .–b.
. For details, see N.T. Bhatt, ‘Introduction’, in MTPVrt, pp. xxii–xxiv.
. Abhinavagupta, IPV .., p. –. See my Body and Cosmology in
    Kashmir ˆaivism (San Francisco: Mellen Research University Press, ),
    pp. –.
. E.g. RA Kriy®p®da .–, described –b; these are supplementary
    chapters. N.R. Bhatt (ed.), Raurav®gama, vol. III (Pondicherry: Institut
    Français d’Indologie, ).
. SSP, pp. xiii–xiv.
. On the six ways, see SSP, vol. , pp. xiii–xxii. There are extremely helpful
    plates in vol.  illustrating the parallels between each of the ways (especially
    plate ). See also Padoux, V®c, pp. –.
. RA Kriy®p®da, supplementary chapter .–.
. For a comparative table, see SSP vol. , Pl. VIIA.
. MVT ..
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘The Doctrine of the M®lin¬vijayottaratantra’, in Teun
    Goudriaan (ed.), Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Studies in Honour
    of André Padoux (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
. For an excellent account of the ◊a¥adhvan, see Padoux, V®c, pp. –.
. RA Kriy®p®da .c-b.
. MVT .; vr. tti.
. RA, vol. III. . –: ˜ivasam. sk®rasam. bandh®d bhasmarudr®k◊ami˜ran. ®t/
    ˜ikh®yajñopav¬tam. tu dhr. tv® d¬k◊ita ucyate//// jan. gamaΩ ˜uddha˜aivam. tu
    tattattantre prave˜ayet/ ˜®strasya sam. prad®nena ˜®srtad¬k◊eti cocyate////
                         The Tantric Body
                                                                         .
    ja¥¬ v® mun. ¥ako v®pi ˜iv®c®ryaΩ prave˜akaΩ/ sth®varam. lin gam ity
    ®hur jan. gamas tu mahe˜varaΩ//// mahe˜varapad®vi◊ﬂam. sth®nam. yat
    sam. pad®m. padam / br®hman. o v®pi can. ¥®laΩ sugun. o durgun. o ‘pi v®////
    bhasmarudr®k◊asam. mi˜raΩ ˜iva eva na sam. ˜ayaΩ/ ity etac chaiva utpanne
    pa˜c®c chaivam. samm. ®caret////. I have followed the alternative reading
                                 .                                      .
    given by Bhatt for d as jan gamam. tu mahe˜varam. The term jan gama could
    be a proper name for a ˆaiva sect. Also Mrg Caryap®da .–.
. Hélène Brunner, ‘The Sexual Aspect of the Lin. ga Cult According to the
    Saiddh®ntika Scriptures’, in Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II, pp.
    –.
. SSP, vol. ; Davis, Ritual in an Oscillating Universe, pp. –.
. Jorg Gengnagel, ‘The ˆaiva Siddh®nta §c®rya as Mediator of Religious
    Identity’, in Vasudha Dalmia, Angelika Maninar, and Martin Christof
    (eds), Charisma and Canon: Essays on the Religious History of the Indian
    Subcontinent (New Delhi and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), pp.
    –.
. SSP, vol. , pp. xxvii–xxx.
. Thus in vol.  of the SSP she corrects her earlier reading of the material.
    Brunner-Lachaux, SSP, vol. , p. xxxi.
. RA Kriy®p®da, supplement .
. See H. Brunner, ‘Le s®dhaka, un personnage oublié du ˜ivaisme du Sud’,
    Journal Asiatique, , pp. –.
. Brunner, ‘Le s®dhaka’, p. .
. Alexis Sanderson, ‘Man. ¥ala and §gamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir’,
    in Mantras et Diagrammes Rituels dans l’Hindouisme (Paris: CNRS, ), pp.
    –.
. Brunner, ‘Le s®dhaka’, p. , n. Mrg Cary®p®da, .– and commentary.
    On the identiﬁcation of the bubhuk◊u with the householder and the mumuk◊u
    with the ascetic (tapasvin), see C. Caillat, ‘Le S®dhaka ˆaiva à la Lumière
    de la Discipline Jaina’, in Klaus Brun and Albrechy Wezler (eds), Studien
    zum Jainismus und Buddhismus: Gedenkschrift für Ludwig Alsdorf (Wiesbaden:
    Franz Steiner, ), pp. –.
. SSP, vol. , .–. For a clear account that summarises much of the detail
    found in Siddh®nta texts such as the SSP, see Davis, ˆiva in an Oscillating
    Universe, pp. –.
. SSP, vol. , chapter .
. SSP, vol. , chapter ; described by Brunner-Lachaux in summary form, pp.
    xxxviii–xliii. My account here generally follows hers.
. Brunner-Lachaux, ‘Introduction’ p. xxxix: ‘La cordelette ainsi préparée
    est l’image du disciple, avec son ®tman emprisonné de liens (d’où son nom
    pa˜us‚tra, “cordelette des liens”)’.
. These Lords of the kal®s, the ‘cause deities’, K®ran. e˜varas or K®ran. as, are
    Brahman, Vi◊n. u, Rudra, ¡˜vara, and Sad®˜iva. Listed by Brunner-Lachaux,
    SSP, vol. , p.  n.
. SSP, vol. ..–: brahmam. s tav®dhik®re ’smin mumuk◊um. d¬k◊ay®my
    aham/ bh®vyam. tvay®nuk‚lena vidhim. vijñ®payed iti//// ®v®hayet
    tato dev¬m. rakt®m. v®g¬˜var¬m. hr. d®/ icch®jñ®nakriy®r‚p®m. ◊a¥vidh®d-
                                     Notes                                   

    hvaikak®rin. ¬m//// p‚jayet tarpayed dev¬m. prak®ren. amun® tataΩ/
    v®g¬˜varam. ca niΩ˜e◊ayonivik◊obhak®ran. am//// hr. tsam. puﬂ®tmab¬j®di-
    hum. pha¥anta˜ar®n. un®/ t®¥ayedd hr. dayam. tasya praﬁ˜ec ca vidh®nauit//
    /tataΩ vi◊yasya caitanyam. hr. di vahnikan. opamam/ nivr. ttistham.
    yutam. p®˜air jye◊ﬂhay® vibhajed yath®//// om. h®m. ham. h®m. haΩ
                                                                      .
    hum. phaﬂ/ om. h®m. ham. h®m. sv®h®/ ity anen®tha p‚raken. ®n ku˜amudray®
    tad®kr. ◊y®tmamantren. a gr. h¬tv®tmani yojayet/ om. h®m. ham. h®m. ®tmane
    namaΩ/ pitror vibh®vya sam. yogam. caitanyam. recakena tat/ brahm®-
    dik®ran. aty®gakram®n n¬tv® ˜iv®s padam//// garbh®dh®n®rtham®d®ya
    yugapatsarvayoni◊u/ k◊iped v®g¬˜var¬yonau v®mayodbhavamudray®////
    yath® – om. h®m. ham. h®m. ®tmane namaΩ/ p‚jaed apy anenaiva tarpayed
    api pañcadh®/ asya yoni˜u sarv®su dehasiddim. hr. d®caret//// n®tra
    pum. savanam. stry®di˜ar¬rasy®pi sam. bhav®t/ s¬mantonnayanam. c®pi daiv®d
    andh®didehataΩ//// ˜iras® janma kurv¬ta yugapat sarvadehin®m
    / tathaiva bh®vayed e◊®m adhik®ram. ˜ikh®n. un® //// bhogam. ka-
    vacanmantren. a ˜astren. a vi◊ay®tmanoΩ/ mohar‚pam abhedam. ca la-
    yasam. jñam. vibh®vayet//// ˜ivena srotas®m. ˜uddhim. hr. d® tattvavi˜od-
    hanam/ pañcapañc®hutir dady®d garbh®dh®n®di◊u kram®t////
. SSP, vols , ; Brunner-Lachaux notes, pp. –.
. KirT .–, and commentary; Goodall, Kiran. a-tantra, pp. –.
. For an excellent, full account of ˆaiva ritual see Brunner-Lachaux, ‘Intro-
    duction’, SSP, vol. , pp. xx–xxxii.
. RA Kriy®p®da .cd on the pañca˜uddhi or bh‚ta˜uddhi; – on the
    visualisation of Sad®˜iva. On ritual procedures of puriﬁcation of the place,
    inner worship, puriﬁcation of ritual implements, puriﬁcation of the body, of
                      .
    mantra, of the lin ga, inner worship of ˆiva and puriﬁcation of the subtle body
    before external worship, see Ajit Kriy®p®da .cd–ab. Invocation,
    sprinkling the icon, and making offerings of incense, ﬂowers and so on
    follows this. ..cd–.
. MTP .–b; vr. tti. With seven of its attributes the buddhi enchains the
    soul in transmigration and with the eighth (jñ®na) liberates it.
. RA, vol. III, supplement .–b. On the distinction see H. Brunner,
    ‘§tm®rthap‚j® versus par®rthap‚j® in the ˆaiva Tradition’, in T. Goudriaan
    (ed.), Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –.
    Brunner makes the important point that the distinction does not map
    directly on to private and public worship. Temple worship is not ‘public’ in
    the sense that it makes no difference whether there are witnesses or not (p.
    ).
. RA Vidy®p®da .–.
. SSP, vol. , p.  n; RA, chs  and .
. For details of seven kinds of bath, see Mrg Kriy®p®da .
. SSP, vol. , ..
. SSP, vol. , ..
. SSP, vol. ,..
. SSP, vol. , III.
. SSP, vol. , III.–.
. ISG S®m®nya-p®da .–.
                          The Tantric Body

. ISG S®m®nya-p®da .–.
. ISG S®m®nya-p®da .–.
. ISG S®m®nya-p®da .–. This image of the subtle body as an inverted
    banyan tree is found in the manual of Aghora˜iva. The text is given by
    Brunner-Lachaux, SSP, vol. , Appendix , pp. –.
. ISG S®m®nya-p®da .–.
. On the two cosmological systems, see Davis, Ritual in an Oscillating Universe,
    pp. –.
. SSP, vol. , p. , n and plate .
8. SSP, vol. , III.–.
. Ajit Kriy®p®da .ab, ; ..
. SSP, vol. , section iv; see also Ajit Kriy®p®da, chapter .
. E.g. RA Kriy®p®da, chapters , ; SSP, vol. .
. Mrg Cary®p®da .–.
. Mrg Cary®p®da .–.
. Mrg Cary®p®da .–, n.
. Mrg Cary®p®da .–.
. Mrg Cary®p®da .–.
. Mrg Cary®p®da .c– and commentary.


                                  Chapter 7

 . For an important systematic overview, see Sanderson ‘ˆaivism and the
    Tantric Traditions’, in S. Sutherland et al. (eds), The World’s Religions
    (London: Routledge, ), pp. –. For good introductions to doctrine
    and practice, see Mark Dyczkowski, The Doctrine of Vibration: An Analysis
    of the Doctrines and Practices of Kashmir Shaivism (Albany NY: SUNY
    Press, ); P. Muller-Ortega, The Triadic Heart of ˆiva: Kaula Tantrism
    of Abhinavagupta in the Non-Dual Shaivism of Kashmir (Albany NY: SUNY
    Press, ).
 . IPV .: nir®bh®s®t p‚rn. ®d aham iti pur® bh®sayati.
 . TA . cd–b: Anuttaravisarg®tma˜iva˜aktyadvay®tamni// par®mar˜o
    nirbharatv®d aham ity ucyate vibhoΩ/ I have been guided by Padoux’s transla-
    tion: ‘La prise de conscience de l’Ominprésent dans la non-dualité de ˆiva
    et de l’Énergie, c.-à-d. de l’Incomparable et de l’émission [cosmique], est,
    en raison de tout ce qu’elle contient, appelée le “Je”.’ Padoux, ‘aham’, in
    H. Brunner, G. Oberhammer and A. Padoux (eds), Tantr®bhidh®nako˜a I.
    Dictionnaire es termes techniques de la littérature hindoue tantrique (Vienna: Der
    Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, ), pp. –.
 . Utpala, Aja¥apam®tr. siddhi quoted by Jayaratha .ab. Padoux’s transla-
    tion, Lilian Silburn and André Padoux, La Lumière sur les Tantras: La
    Tantr®loka d’Abhinavagupta chapitres  à  (Paris: de Boccard, ), p.
    .
 . TA .c-b: anuttar®dy® prasr. tir h®nt® ˜aktisvar‚pin. ¬////
    pratyy®hr. t®˜e◊avi˜v®nuttare s® nil¬yate/ tadidam. vi˜vamantaΩstham. ˜aktau
    s®nuttare pare//// tattasy®miti yatsatyam. vibhun® sam. puﬂikr. tiΩ/ tena
                                        Notes                                       

    ˜r¬tr¬˜ik®˜®stre ˜akteΩ sam. puﬂit®kr. tiΩ//// sam. vittau bh®ti yadvi˜vam. tatr®pi
    khalu sam. vid®/ tadetatritayam. dvandvayog®tsam. gh®tat®m. gatam////
    ekam eva param. r‚pam. bhairavasy®ham®tmakam. I have been guided by
    Padoux’s translation La Lumière sur les Tantra, pp. –. On the identiﬁca-
    tion of Bhairava with other terms in the process called nirvacana, see Eivind
    Kahrs, Indian Semantic Analysis: The Nirvacana Tradition (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
 . TA .c–; Padoux, La Lumière sur les Tantras, p. .
 . TA ..
 . TA .c–b and commentary.
 . Jaideva Singh, Abhinavagupta: A Trident of Wisdom: Translation of Par®tr¬˜ik®
    Vivaran. a (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), p. .
. Kerry M. Skora, ‘Consciousness of Consciousness: Reﬂexive Awareness in
    the Trika ˆaivism of Abhinavagupta’, Ph.D. thesis (University of Virginia,
    ).
. Singh, Abhinavagupta, p. .
. SSV ., p. .
. See Gavin Flood, Body and Cosmology in Kashmir ˆaivism (San Francisco:
    Mellen Research University Press, ), chs  and .
. PTV  and , commentary pp. –.
. PTV p. .
. PH auto commentary on s‚tra , p. . tath® hi citprak®˜®t avyatirikt®
    nityoditamah®mantrar‚p® p‚rn. ®hamvimara˜amay¬ y® iyam. par® v®k˜aktiΩ
    ®dik◊®ntar‚p®˜e◊a˜akticakragarbhin. ¬ s® t®vat pa˜yant¬madhyam®dikramen. a
    gr®hakabh‚mik®m. bh®sayti/ tatra ca par®r‚patvena svar‚pam aprathayant¬
    m®y®pram®tuΩ asphuﬂ®s®dh®ran. ®rth®vabh®sar‚p®m. pratik◊an. a navnav®m.
    vikalpakriy®mull®sayati ˜uddham api ca avikalpabh‚mim tad®cch®dit®m eva
    dar˜ayati.
. On the Goddess Par® and the alphabet deities of Trika, see Alexis Sanderson,
    ‘The Visualisation of the Deities of the Trika’, in André Padoux (ed.),
    L’image divine, culte et méditation dans l’Hindouisme (Paris: CNRS, ),
    pp. –.
. For the standard account of this, see André Padoux, V®c: The Concept of the
    Word in Selected Hindu Tantras, trans. J. Gontier (Albany NY: SUNY Press,
    ), pp. –.
. See ibid, pp. –; also Muller-Ortega, The Triadic Heart of ˆiva, pp.
    , .
. This additional level is a signiﬁcant difference between the Pratyabhijñ® and
    the Grammarians. Som®nanda objects to Bhartr. hari’s identiﬁcation of the
    absolute with the third level of speech, pa˜yant¬, on the grounds that pa˜yant¬
    is from a transitive verb coming from the root dr. ˜, to see, and therefore
    implies an object. The absolute is beyond all subject–object differentiation
    and so there must be a supreme level beyond pa˜yant¬. ˆivadr. ◊ﬂi .–.
    See K.C. Pandey, Abhinavagupta, An Historical and Philosophical Study, nd
    edition (Banaras: Chowkhamba Sanskrit Series Ofﬁce, ), pp. –;
    D.S. Ruegg, Contributions á l’histoire de la philosophie linguistique indienne
    (Paris: de Boccard, ), p. .
                              The Tantric Body

. PH s‚tra : citireva cetanapad®davararu¥h® cetyasamkocin¬    .        cittam.
. PH p. : asy®m hi prasaranty®m jagat unmi◊ati vyavti◊ﬂhe ca, nivr. ttaprasar®y®m           .
    ca nimi◊ati.
. For a fuller treatment, see my Body and Cosmology, pp. –. For the idea
    of stages of awakening in the Svacchanda-tantra, see T. Goudriaan ‘The
    Stages of Awakening in the Svacchanda-tantra’, in Teun Goudriaan (ed.),
    Ritual and Speculation in Early Tantrism: Essays in Honour of André Padoux
    (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
. PH : tad® prak®˜®nandas®ramah®mantrav¬ry®tmakap‚rn. ®hant®ve˜®t sad®
    sarvasargasam. h®rak®rinijasam. viddevat®cakre˜varat®pr®ptir bhavat¬ti ˜ivam.
    Also Spanda-k®rik®s III..
. See references in Dyczkowski, The Doctrine of Vibration, p. .
. Pandey, Abhinavagupta, p. . Silburn, L. Hymnes aux K®l¬, La Roue des
    Énergies Divine (Paris: de Boccard, ), pp. –.
. DH. Sri Ragunath Temple Manuscript Library, Jammu, pp. –, –;
    text courtesy of Alexis Sanderson. This text slightly differs from that
    published by Pandey, which is reproduced by Silburn for her translation. In
    that text verses  and  are transposed – the present manuscript probably has
    the correct ordering which makes more sense – and for ˜abda in verse  read
    ˜ruti in our text. In the transliteration below I have retained the manuscript’s
    use of the anusv®ra for most nasals.
. Sanderson, ‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’, pp. –. Rastogi does not think
    that this text is explicitly from the Krama tradition. N. Rastogi, The Krama
    Tantrism of Kashmir (Delhi: MLBD, ), p. .
. Silburn, Hymnes aux K®l¬, p. : ‘L’homme ordinaire est broyé par le cercle
    infernal de ses propres énergies formant pur lui la roue du temps st de
    l’angoisse dont le movement ne s’arrête jamais.’
. DH, p. : sva˜®nta m         . nirmalam    . ˜uddham   . sarvavy®piniram         . janam
    cidbodh®nam. dagaha[na?]tejas sarv®˜rayam       . bhajet.
. Om . ˜r¬ gan. e˜®ya namaΩ om    . ˜r¬ asurasuravr. m . davam . ditam abhimatavaravi-
    taran. e niratam. dar˜ana˜at®gryap‚jya m   . pr®n. atanum  . gan. apatim. vam   . de////
    varav¬rayogin¬gan. asiddh®valip‚jit®m. ghriyugalam        . apahr. tavinayijan®rtim        .
    vaﬂukam ap®n®bhidham      . vam . de//// yo dh¬balena vi˜vam bhakt®n®m            . ˜ivap-
    atham . bh®ti tam aham avadh®nar‚pam       . sadgurum amalam      . sad® vam    . de////
    ®tm¬yavi◊ayabhogair im. driyadevyaΩ sad® hr. dam. bhoje abhip‚jam. ti yam       . tam . cin-
    mayam ®nam. dabhairavam      . vam . de//// uday®vabh®sacarvan. al¬l®m        . vi˜vasya
    y® karoty ani˜am  . ®nam . dabhairav¬m . t®m. vimar˜ar‚p®m   . aham . vam . de//// ar-
    cayati bhairavam  . y® ni˜cayakusumaiΩ sure˜apatrasth® pran. am®mi buddhir‚p®m             .
    brahm®r. ¬m. t®m. aham . satatam//// kurute bhairavap‚j®m analadalasth®bhim
    ®nakusumair y® nityam ahamkr. tir‚p®m      . vam         . ˜®m
                                                      . de t®m     . bhav¬m. amb®m////
    vidad®ti bhairav®rc®m   . dak◊in. adalag® vi˜e◊akusumair y® nityam   . man®Ωsvar‚p®m       .
    kaum®r¬m. t®m aham    . vam . de//// nain[r]r. tadalag® bhairavam arcayate ˜ab-
    dakusumair y® pran. am®mi ˜rutir‚p®m     . nity®m . t®m. vaisn[◊n. ]av¬m . ˜akt¬m////
    pa˜cimadigdalasam. sth® hr. dayaharaiΩ spar˜akusumair y® to◊ayati bhairavam                .
    t®m. tvagr‚padhar®m    . nam®mi v®r®h¬m//// varatarar‚pavi˜e◊air m®ruta-
    digdalani◊asma[n. n. a?]deh® y® p‚jayati bhairavam       . t®m im  . dr®n. ¬ m
                                                                                 . dr. ktanum  .
    vam. de//// dhanapatikisala(ya)nilay® nityam        . vividha◊a¥ras®h®raiΩ p‚jayati
                                      Notes                                      

    bhairavam . t®m
                  . jihv®bhikhy®m . nam®mi c®mum   . d®m//// ¬˜adalasth® bhairavam
    arcayate parimalair vicitrair y® pran. am®mi sarvad® t®m  . ghr®n. ®bhikhy®m
                                                                               . mah®-
    lak◊m¬m////
            .         ◊a¥dar˜ane◊up‚jyam . ◊a¥trim
                                                 . ˜attattvasam         . ®tm®bhikhyam
                                                                . valitam            .
    satatam . k◊etrapatim. siddhidam . naumi//// sam      . sphurad anubhavas®ram  .
    sarv®m. taΩ satatasam. nihitam
                                 . naumi sadoditam ittham     . nijadehagadevat®cakra
    m//// iti ˜r¬dehasthadevat®cakrastotram     . sam. p‚rn. am. sam®p[an]nam.
. David Kinsley, Tantric Visions of the Divine Feminine: The Ten Mah®vidy®s
    (University of California Press, ), p. .
. Marie-Thérèse de Mallmann, Les Enseignements Iconographiques de l’Agni-
    Pur®n. a (Paris: Presses Universitaires de France, ), pp. –. Here
    they are Br®hm¬, ˆan. kar¬, Kaumar¬, Lak◊m¬, V®r®h¬, Aindr¬ and C®mun. ¥®.
    Mah®lak◊m¬ is sometimes added.
. NeT . –. Here their names are Br®hm¬, M®he˜var¬, Kaumar¬, Vai◊n. av¬,
    V®r®h¬, M®hendr¬, C®mun. ¥® and Bahur‚pin. ¬, and they are ordered from
    the east. K◊emar®ja in his commentary gives an alternative arrangement.
    H. Brunner, ‘Un Tantra du Nord: Le Netra Tantra’, Bulletin de l’École
    Française d’Extrême-Orient  (), pp. –; p. .
. TA .– and commentary.
. ISG Kriy®p®da .–. The seven are Br®hm¬, M®he˜var¬, Kaumar¬,
    Vai◊n. av¬, V®r®h¬, Aindr¬ and C®mun. ¥®. For example, the boar-headed
    goddess V®r®h¬ is to be visualised as having boar’s tusks, mounted on a
    ram, holding a plough, discus and lotus, terrible yet splendid. V®r®h¬,
    like C®mun. ¥®, appears as a distinct deity, although this visualisation does
    not correspond to that in a later text, the Mantramahodadhi. Gudrun
    Bühnemann, The Iconography of Hindu Tantric Deities (Gronigen: Egbert
    Forsten, ), pp. –.
. TAV ., p. . John R. Dupuche, Abhinavagupta: The Kula Ritual as
    Elaborated in Chapter  of the Tantr®loka (Delhi: MLBD, ), p. .
. MNPrak .ab. The arising of circle of bliss is revealed as the true
    nature of one’s own experience: ®nandacakrasya yathopapatti padar˜igtam          .
    sv®nubhavasvar‚pam.
. See references in Dyczkowski, The Doctrine of Vibration, p. . See Chapter
     of this book for a general account of the circle of the senses and its interface
    with the divine body.
. PH  and auto-commentary.
. See, for example, Dominik Wujastyk, ‘Interpréter l’image du corps humain
    dans l’Inde pré-moderne’ in Véronique Boullier and Gilles Tarabout, Images
    du corps dans le monde hindou (Paris: CNRS, ), pp. –.
. D. White, The Kiss of the Yogin¬: ‘Tantric Sex’ in its South Asian Contexts
    (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), pp. –.
. Kaul .–.
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaivism and the Tantric Traditions’, p. ; D. Heiligjers-Seelen,
    The System of Five Cakras in the Kubjik®matatantra – (Groningen:
    Egbert Forsten, ). White locates an earlier origin for the system. D.
    White, The Alchemical Body: Siddha Traditions in Medieval India (Chicago:
    University of Chicago Press, ), p. . One of the earliest descriptions
    is in the Kaulajñ®na-nirn. aya.
                          The Tantric Body

. See André Padoux, ‘Corps et cosmos: l’image du corps du yogin tantrique’,
    in Boullier and Tarabout Images du corps, pp. –; p. . For a full
    account see Heiligjers-Seelen, The System of Five Cakras.
. On Kubjik®, see Mark Dyczkowski, ‘Kubjik®, the Erotic Goddess. Sexual
    Potency, Transformation and Reversal in the Heterodox Theophanies of the
    Kubjik® Cult’, Indologica Tauinensia – (–), pp. –.
. A. Sanderson, ‘Man. ¥ala and §gamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir’,
    p. . In Mantras et Diagrammes Rituels dans l’Hindouisme (Paris: CNRS,
    ), pp. –.
. See David White, ‘Le Monde dans le corps du siddha: microcosmologie
    dans les traditions médiévale indiennes’, in Boullier and Tarabout, Images
    du corps, pp. –. The standard text through which Kun. ¥alin¬ and the
    cakras became famous in the West is John Woodroffe, The Serpent Power,
    Being the —aﬂ–Cakra–Nir‚pana and P®duka-Pañcaka (Madras: Ganesh and
    Co.,  []), a translation of Pun. y®nanda’s ◊aﬂcakranirupanam. See
    Lilian Silburn, Kun. ¥alin¬, Energy of the Depths: A Comprehensive Study
    Based on the Scriptures of Nondualistic Ka˜mir ˆaivism, trans. J. Gontier
    (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ), pp. –.
. LT .–. The text does have the usual six of ®dh®ra, n®bhi, hr. t, kan. ﬂha,
    t®lu and bhr‚madhya, along with the dv®da˜®nta and lalat® between there
    and the bhr‚madhya. Between these are other centres that the text names.
. Sardh .c–b. For an account of recent conﬂations of subtle, tantric
    anatomy with modern physiology see Dominik Wujastyk, ‘Interpréter l’image
    du corps humain dans l’Inde pré-moderne’, in Boullier and Tarabout,
    Images du corps, pp. –.
. Sardh. .–; –.
. E.g. Br. had®ran. yaka Upani◊ad ... ‘There are seventy two thousand veins
    named Hit® that run from the heart to the pericardium.’ Patrick Olivelle
    (trans.), The Early Upani◊ads, Annotated Text and Translation (New York
    and Oxford: Oxford University Press, ), p. .
. Padoux, ‘Corps et cosmos’, p. .
. See Silburn, Kun. ¥alin¬, pp. –.
. NeT .–; Brunner ‘Un Tantra du Nord’, pp. –.
. See Brunner, ‘Un Tantra du Nord’, p.  n. Here Brunner gives a table
    showing the correlation between centres of the body, vyomani, cakrani,
    granthayaΩ and sth®n®Ω.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. SSV, pp. f. Passage translated and discussed in Flood, Body and Cosmology,
    pp. –.
. TA .c–b; Padoux, ‘Corps et cosmos’, p. .
. PTV  and ; pp. – of Singh’s translation.
. NeT ..
. TA .–b.
. For a description of the up®yas, see Flood, Body and Cosmology, pp. –.
. Sanderson, ‘Man. ¥ala and the §gamic Identity in the Trika of Kashmir’, pp.
    –.
. For an account of this rite as described by Abhinavagupta, see Dupuche,
    Abhinavagupta: The Kula Ritual.
                                     Notes                                    

. Sanderson, ‘Man. ¥ala and §gamic Identity’, p. .
. E.g. MTV Kriy®p®da .–, discussed by Alexis Sanderson, BSOAS
     (), pp. –. Reference from Hélène Brunner ‘The Sexual
                         .
    Aspect of the Lin ga Cult According to the Saiddh®ntika Scriptures’, in G.
    Oberhammer (ed.), Studies in Hinduism II. Miscellania to the Phenomenon of
    Tantras (Vienna: Der Österreichischen Akademie der Wissenschaften, ),
    pp. –.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. The use of cannabis (vijaya) is sometimes documented in tantric texts
    accompanying the use of alcohol. See A. Bharati, The Tantric Tradition
    (London: Rider, ), pp. –.
. Yoni-tantra ., .. J.A. Schotermann, The Yoni-tantra Critically Edited
    with an Introduction (Delhi: Manohar, ), pp. –.
. White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, especially chs  and .
. Sanderson, ‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’, pp. –.
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaiva and Tantric Traditions’, p. .
. On the degrees of distance from orthodoxy and corresponding intensiﬁcation
    of antinomian elements in ritual see Sanderson, ‘Meaning in Tantric Ritual’,
    pp. –.
. TA ., . KMT ., . Reference from T. Goudriaan and J.A.
    Schoterman, ‘Introduction’, The Kubjik®matatantra, Kulalik®mnaya Version
    (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –; p. .
. Sanderson, ‘ˆaiva and Tantric Traditions’, p. .
                                                                .
. PTV  p. –. tath®hi tanmadhyan®¥¬r̄‚pasya ubhayalin g®tmano ’pi tadvir-
    yots®habalalabdh®va◊ﬂambhasya kampak®le sakala viryak◊obhojjigami◊®tmakam
    antaΩspar˜asukhaam     . svasam
                                  . vits®k◊ikameva/ na ca etatkalpita˜ar¬rani◊ﬂha-
    tayaiva kevalam    . tadabhijñ®nopade˜adv®ren. a iyati mah®mantrav¬ryavisar-
    gavi˜le◊an. ®v®ptadhruvapade parabrahmaya˜iva˜aktisam. ghaﬂﬂ®nandasv®tantrya-
    sr. ◊ﬂipar®bhaﬂﬂ®rik®r‚pe ‘nuprave˜aΩ/. Singh’s translation, pp. –.
. On the idea of the memory of tradition see Gavin Flood, The Ascetic Self:
    Subjectivity, Memory and Tradition (Cambridge: Cambridge University
    Press, ), pp. –.
. PTV pp. – , Singh’s translation.
. Br. had®ran. yaka Upani◊ad ..; translated by Olivelle, The Early Upani◊ads,
    p. .
. Ch®ndogya Upani◊ad ..–; translated by Olivelle, The Early Upani◊ads,
    pp. –.
. Leslie C. Orr, Donors, Devotees, and Daughters of God: Temple Women in
    Medieval Tamilnadu (New York and Oxford: Oxford University Press,
    ). On temple women as pras®da, see p. . As were all initiates, male
    and female, temple women were branded with the mark of afﬁliation to their
    deity (p. ).
. On the important term adhik®ra, see Brunner, Oberhammer and Padoux
    (eds), T®ntrik®bhidh®nako˜a I, pp. –.
. Flood, The Ascetic Self, pp. –. See also the account and translation of
    the text by Dupuche, Abhinvagupta, The Kula Ritual; Silburn, Kun. ¥alin¬,
    pp. –; Flood, Body and Cosmology, pp. –.
                         The Tantric Body

. Silburn, Kun. ¥alin¬, p. . On this practice and in connection with betel
    chewing, see White, Kiss of the Yogin¬, p. .
. On the ﬁve ms, see Bharati, The Tantric Tradition, pp. –.
. TA .– and commentary. For a useful account see Dupuche, Abhinava-
    gupta, The Kula Ritual, pp. –.
. Bharati, The Tantric Tradition, pp. –.
. TA .–.


                                 Chapter 8
 . The term imaginaire is from Castoriadis, who claims that the forms of cultural
    life are created within a particular imaginaire. It does not denote a deﬁcient
    or secondary mode of being. C. Castoriadis, ‘The Imaginary: Creation in the
    Socio-Historical Domain’, in C. Castoradis, World in Fragments: Writings
    on Politics, Society, Psychoanalysis, and the Imagination, ed. and trans. D.A.
    Curtis (Stanford University Press, ), pp. –; p. .
 . This term is from William F. Hanks, ‘Exorcism and the Description of
    Participant Roles’, in M. Silverstein and Greg Urban (eds), Natural Histories
    of Discourse (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), pp. –;
    p. .
 . Mrg Kriy®p®da, ch. .
 . See Richard A. Darmon, ‘Vajroli mudr®. La retention seminale’, in Véronique
    Boullier and Gilles Tarabout (eds), Images du corps dans le monde hindou
    (Paris: CNRS, ), pp. –.
 . For the most thorough treatment of this practice, including critical edition
    and translation of the Khecar¬vidy®, accompanied by notes that draw both
    on other texts and on ﬁeldwork among yogins, see James Mallinson, The
    Khecar¬vidy® of Adin®tha: A Critical Edition and Annotated Translation
    (London: Routledge, ).
 . André Padoux, ‘The Body in Tantric Ritual: The Case of the Mudr®s’, in T.
    Goudriaan (ed.), Panels of the VIIth World Sanskrit Conference, vol. : The
    Sanskrit Tradition and Tantrism (Leiden: Brill, ), pp. –.
 . Abhinavagupta TA, vol. , p. : mudam. svar‚pal®bh®khyam. dehadv®ren. a
    c®tman®m/ r®ty arpayati yat tena mudr® ˜®stre◊u varn. it®. Quoted by Padoux,
    ‘The Body in Tantric Ritual’, p. .
 . Padoux, ‘The Body in Tantric Ritual’, p. .
 . André Padoux, ‘Contributions a l’Étude du Mantra˜®stra’, I, II, III, Bulletin
    de l’École Française d’Extrème Orient  (), pp. –;  (), pp.
    –;  (), pp. –.
. Harvey Alper (ed.), Understandng Mantras (Albany NY: SUNY Press,
    ).
. J. Gonda, ‘The Indian Mantra’, Oriens  (), pp. –.
. MVT ..
. SSV ., p. .
. IPV ..
. Gonda, ‘The Indian Mantra’, p. .
                                   Notes                                   

. Alper, Understandng Mantras, p. .
. For an interesting reading of mantra that links Sliverstein’s semiotics to
    structuralism, see Robert A. Yelle, Explaining Mantras: Ritual, Rhetoric and
    the Dream of a Natural Language in Hindu Tantra (New York and London:
    Routledge, ), pp. –.
. Padoux, V®c, p. .
. See Stephan Beyer, The Cult of T®r®: Magic and Ritual in Tibet (Berkeley:
    University of California Press, ), pp. –.
. Pratapaditya Pal, Hindu Religion and Iconology According to the Tantras®ra
    (Los Angeles: Vichitra Press, ).
. Gudrun Bühnemann, The Iconography of Tantric Deities,  vols (Groningen:
    Egbert Forsten, ). Bühnemann gives an excellent survey of tantric
    iconographic literature, vol. , pp. –.
. The following material is taken from Gavin Flood, ‘The Puriﬁcation of the
    Body in Tantric Ritual Representation’, Indo-Iranian Journal  (), pp.
    –; pp. –.
. This usage is not dissimilar to that of medieval Europe, where the term
    ‘memory’ had the double implication of storing information (inventory) and
    creation through the imagination (invention). See Mary Carruthers, The
    Book of Memory (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ).
. JS ..
. JS .b–a.
. JS .a.
. A◊ﬂ ... The same also applies to the imperative (loﬂ).
. See Jayashree A. Gune, The Meaning of Tenses and Moods: The Text of
    Kaun. ¥abhaﬂﬂa’s Lak®r®srthanirn. aya with Introduction, English Translation
    and Explanatory Notes (Pune: Deccan College, ), p. .
. See ibid., pp. –.
. Quoted in ibid., p. .
. See Benjamin Whorf, ‘The Relation of Habitual Thought to Language’, in
    John B. Caroll (ed.), Language, Thought and Reality (Cambridge MA: MIT
    Press,  []), pp. , .
. G. Lakoff and M. Johnson, Metaphors We Live By (Chicago: University of
    Chicago Press, ).
. G. Flood, The Ascetic Self: Subjectivity, Memory and Tradition (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
. Roman Jacobsen, ‘Closing Statement: Linguistics and Poetics’, in Thomas
    A. Sebeok (ed.), Style in Language (Cambridge MA: MIT Press, ), pp.
    –, especially p. . See also A.J. Greimas, Structural Semantics: An
    Attempt at Method, trans. S. McDowell Schleifer and A, Velie (Lincoln:
    University of Nebraska Press, ), pp. –; –.
. V.N. Volosinov, Marxism and the Philosophy of Language, trans. L. Matejka
    and I.R. Titunik (Cambridge MA: Harvard University Press, ), p. .
. K. Oehler, ‘An Outline of Peirce’s Semiotics’, in Martin Krampen, Klaus
    Oehler, Roland Posner, Thomas A. Seboeok and Thure von Uexkull (eds),
    Classics of Semiotics (New York: Plenum Press, ), p. .
. Greg Urban, ‘The “I” of Discourse’, in Benjamin Lee and Greg Urban
                        The Tantric Body

    (eds), Semiotics, Self and Society (Berlin and New York: Mouton de Gruyter,
    ), pp. –. See also G. Urban, A Discourse-centred Approach to Culture
    (Austin: University of Texas Press, ).
. The use of the optative means that ‘he is impelling me to action; he is
    engaging in an operation which is conducive to my action.’ Apadeva,
    M¬m®m. s® Ny®ya Prak®˜a, trans. Frankin Edgerton (Cambridge MA:
    Harvard University Press, ), p. .
. M. Silverstein and G. Urban (eds), ‘Introduction’, Natural Histories of
    Discourse (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ), p. .


                                Appendix
 . I have followed Rastelli and taken kr. v®ﬂike to be kr. k®ﬂake. Rastelli,
    Philosophisch-theologische Grundanschauungen, p. .
 . Namely at .–. Ref from Rastelli, Philosophisch-theologische
    Grundanschauungen, p. .
 . The term bh‚t®v®sa could also be rendered as ‘body’, the abode of the
    elements.
               Suggested Further Reading




Boullier, Véronique and Gilles Tarabout (eds), Images du corps dans le monde
   hindou (Paris: CNRS, ).
Davis, R., Ritual in an Oscillating Universe: Worshipping ˆiva in Medieval India
   (Princeton NJ: Princeton University Press, ).
Flood, Gavin (ed.), The Blackwell Companion to Hinduism (Oxford: Blackwell,
   ).
Goudriaan, Teun, S. Gupta and D. van Hoens, Hindu Tantrism (Leiden: Brill,
   ).
Padoux, André, ‘Tantrism’, in M. Eliade (general ed.), The Encyclopaedia of
   Religions (New York: Macmillan, ), vol. , pp. –.
——— V®c: The Concept of the Word in Selected Hindu Tantras, trans. J. Gontier
   (Albany NY: SUNY Press, ).
Sanderson, Alexis, ‘Power and Purity among the Brahmans of Kashmir’, in
   Michael Carruthers, Steven Collins and Steven Lukes (eds), The Category of
   the Person (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, ), pp. –.
——— ˆaivism and Tantric Traditions’, in S. Sutherland et al. (eds), The World’s
   Religions (London: Routledge, ), pp. –.
Schrader, Otto, Introduction to the P®ñcar®tra and the Ahirbudhnya Sam. hit®
   (Madras: Adyar Library,  []).
White, David, The Kiss of the Yogin¬: ‘Tantric Sex’ in its South Asian Contexts
   (Chicago: University of Chicago Press, ).
                                    Index




Abhinavagupta , , , , ,           art , 
    –, , , , , , , ,      tantric 
    –, , , –, , ,     artha , , , , , 
    , , , , , , ,     Artha˜®stra 
                                        §ryans 
abhi◊eka , , ,                     ®ryav®rta 
®c®rya , , , , , ,         asceticism , , , , , 
                                           cremation ground , 
®c®rya-®bhi◊eka                         ascetics , , 
Advaita Ved®nta ,                         cremation ground 
aesthetics , ,                       ®˜ramas , , 
§gama , , , , , ,             atim®rga –, 
§gama¥ambara , –,                   ®tman , , 
agency , , , , ,             Aurobindo 
Aghora –,                            ®ve˜a, see possession
Aghora˜iva ,                         Ayurveda , 
Aghor¬s 
Agni-pur®n. a                           Bakhtin, M. 
Ajit®gama                                Benares 
alcohol ,                            Bengal , , 
Alper, H. ,                          Beyer, S. 
Amal®nanda .                             Bhagavad-g¬t® , 
§nandabhairava –,                   Bh®gavata-pur®n. a , 
§nandabhairav¬ –,                   Bh®gavatas 
anaphora –                            Bhairava , , , , , 
anthropology                             bhakti , , , 
appeasement                             Bhartr. hari , 
architecture, temple , ,             Bh®ruci , 
Arjuna                                   Bh®skarar®ya 
                                       Index                                   

bhed®bheda                                Bühnemann, G. , 
Bhojadeva , –, 
bh‚ta˜uddhi , , , –,            cakra/s , , , –
     , , –, , ,           Cambodia , 
Bh‚ta˜uddhi                               Can. ¥amah®ro◊ana-tantra 
bhuvana –                               Candellas 
Biardeau, M.                                Cankam literature 
bindu , , , , , ,          cannabis 
     , ,                            caste , , , , , , , ,
birth , , , ,                          , , 
Blacking, J.                               celibacy , 
Blake, W.                                   Chalukya 
body , , , , , –, , , ,      Ch®ndogya-upani◊ad 
     , ,  & passim                     Christianity , , , 
     as identity marker –                 Cidambaram 
     divinisation of , –, ,          circle of power 
         –, , , , , –,     citizen 
         , , , ,              civilisation , , 
     entextualisation of , , , ,          tantric –
         , , , , , , ,      Cola empire , 
         , , , , , ,       Colas, G. 
         –, , .                    Collingwood, 
     genetic vs ritual                    colonialism , 
     inscribed as text , , , , ,    consciousness , , , , ,
         ,                                   , , , , , , –,
     journey through                          , , –, , , ,
     of Ananta                                
     of consciousness                         absolute/universal/unitary ,
     of king ,                                   , , 
     of time                                  emanation of , 
     puriﬁcation of –, ,          historical 
     representation of                      corporeal understanding , , ,
     techniques of , , ,                   , 
     vedic , , –, ,             cosmography 
Brahm®                                     cosmology , , , , , , ,
brahman , ,                               , , –, , , , ,
Brahman/s , , , , , , ,            , , , 
     , , , , , , , , ,   cosmos , , , , , , , ,
     , ,                                , , , , , , ,
     killing a ,                            , , , , , , ,
Br®hman. as                                   , , , , , , ,
Br. had®ran. yaka-upani◊ad ,               , , , , , , ,
Brooks, D.                                     , , , 
Brunner/Brunner-Lachaux, H. ,             cow, veneration of 
     , , , , ,             creation , –, , , ,
bubhuk◊u                                       , , , 
Buddha , , ,                          cremation 
Buddhaghosa                               cremation ground , 
buddhi –, , ,                   critical theory 
Buddhism , , , ,                      Csordas, T.J. , , 
                           The Tantric Body

culture , , , , , , ,       emotion 
   literary                              entextualisation , , , , 
   tantric                                epistemology , 
                                           eroticism , –, , , 
dan. ¥a                                     erotic discourse 
Davidson, R. , , , , , ,           erotic poetry 
                                            erotic sculpture , –
Davies, O. ,                              erotic worship 
Davis, R.                                  erotics 
death , , , , , , , ,      exorcism , 
     , , ,                      experience , , –, , , ,
Dehasthadevat®cakra-stotra ,               , , , , , , ,
     –                                    , 
deity , , , , , , , , ,      essence of 
     , , , , , , ,       mystical 
     ,                               external worship –, 
deixis/metalepsis , 
Delhi Sultanate ,                      family lineage 
desire , , –, , ,           feminist scholarship 
Desjarlais, R.                           festivals , 
detachment ,                          ﬁsh 
Dev¬, see Goddess                          ﬁve acts of ˆiva 
Dev¬mah®tmya                            Foucault, M. 
dharma , , , , , , , ,     Freeman, R. , , , –
     , , , , , , , , ,   frame-space –
     ,                               funeral rites , 
dharma˜®stra , , , , , ,
     ,                               Garu¥a 
dhy®na , , ,                   gender , , , 
d¬k◊®, see initiation                      genealogy 
D¬pt®gama                                gesture , –
discourse , , ,                     God , , , , , , , ,
     brahmanical                              
     legal , –                       Goddess , , , , , , , ,
     political , –                         , , , , , , 
     philosophical                            of speech , , 
dissolution ,                        goddesses , , 
divinisation , –, , ,          Gonda, J. , 
doctrine ,                              good, the highest , , , , ,
Doniger, W. ,                               –
Douglas, M.                              Goodall, D. 
Dyczkowski, M. ,                       Gosvamins 
Dumont, L. ,                           grace , , , 
Durg®                                   Granoff, P. 
D‚t¬ , ,                          Grifﬁths, P. 
dv®da˜®nta                              Guhyak®l¬ 
                                           gun. a/s , 
ecstasy                                 Gupta empire/era , , 
ecosystem                                 Gupta, S. 
embodiment                               guru , , , , , 
                                       Index                                  

Halbfass, W.                                  Trika 
Hanks, W.F.                              inner worship –, 
Hanneder, J. –                           interiority , , 
Haraway, D.                               intertextuality 
Hardy, F.                                 ¡˜®na –, 
Hertz, R.                                 ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva –, 
Hindu, as term                             ¡˜®na˜ivagurudeva-paddhati , , ,
Hinduism , , ,                        , , , , , , ,
history , , ,                            
Hocart, A.M. ,                          Isayeva, N. 
Holi                                      ¡˜varapratyabhijñ®-k®rik®s 
householder ,                           Islam , , 
Huxley, A. 
                                            Java , 
I, the , , , , –, , ,     Jay®khya-sam. hit® , , , , ,
    , ,                                , –, , , , , ,
    indexical , , , , ,            , , , , , , ,
        , , , ,                  , , , , , , ,
I-maker ,                                 
I-ness/I-consciousness , , ,            translation of chapter , –
                                         Jayaratha , , , 
icon , , , , , , , ,      Jayantha Bhaﬂﬂa , –, –, ,
    –                                       , 
iconography                               Jayavarman II 
ideology ,                              J¬m‚tav®hana 
    Hindutva                              J¬v®nanda 
    of kingship ,                       Johnson, M. 
    of universal ruler                    Judaism , 
    of warfare                            jurisprudence 
    tantric , 
imagination , , , , , ,       kaivalya 
    , , , , –              kal®/s , , , , , ,
immanence                                   , 
impurity , , , ,                K®l®gni 
Inden, R. , , , , , ,          K®l®mukhas 
indexiality , , , , ,           K®lasam. kar◊in. ¬ , 
    –,                              K®l¬ 
    variable , , , ,            k®ma , , , , , –, 
India, medieval , , , , , ,       K®ma-˜®stra , , , , –
    , , , , , , , , ,     K®ma-s‚tra 
    , ,                              K®mik®gama , , , 
    scripture in                          Kannada 
individuality ,                        K®p®likas , 
Indology ,                               karma , , , , 
Indra                                     K®rtikeya 
Indus civilisation                        Kashmir , , , , , , ,
initiation , , , , , , , ,      , , 
    , , , , –, ,         Kashmir ˆaivism , , 
                                         Katz, S. 
    ˆaiva Siddh®nta                       kaula , 
                          The Tantric Body

Kaula tradition/Kaulism , ,              , , , , , , ,
                                            , , , , , , ,
Kaulajñ®nanirnaya                           , , , , 
                                             .
Kautilya , ,                         linga , , 
K®vya                                    logic 
Kerala , , , , , , 
Kha¥gar®van. a                           MacIntyre, A. , , , , 
Khajuraho ,                            Mah®-nirv®n. a-tantra 
khecar¬-mudr®                           Mah®puru◊a 
Khmers –                               Mah®v¬ra , 
Killingley, D.                           Mahe˜varananda 
king , , , , , , –, ,      Mahe˜varas –
    , –, , , , , , ,      Mahmud of Ghazni 
    , , , ,                      maithuna , 
kingship , , , , , ,           maithunas , 
    –,                               mala , 
kinship                                  Malayalam 
Kiran. a-tantra , , , , ,     M®lin¬vijayottara-tantra , , ,
                                           , , 
Konarak                                  man. ¥ala , , , , , , ,
Krama , , ,                         , , 
Kr. ◊n. a , ,                       M®n. ¥ukya-upani◊ad 
Kr. ◊n. ®nanda                          mantra , , , , , , , ,
K◊emar®ja , , , , , ,         , , , , , , –,
    , , ,                         , , , , , , ,
Kubjik® , , ,                       , , , , , , ,
Kubjik®mata-tantra , ,               , , –, , 
kula , , , , ,                 path of –, , 
Kula                                    mantra-v¬rya 
Kula prakriy® , , ,            Mantramahodadhi 
Kul®rn. ava-tantra , ,               Mantray®na , 
Kule˜vara , , , ,             mantrin , 
Kule˜var¬ , , , ,             Manu/Manusmr. ti , , , , ,
Kum®ra                                      , 
Kum®ra-tantra , ,                    Marglin, F.A. 
Kum®radeva                              Mariamman 
Kun. ¥alin¬ , , –                marman 
                                           marriage 
Lakoff, G.                              Marriott, M. 
                                                  .
Lak◊m¬ , ,                         Matangaparame˜vara-tantra , 
Lak◊m¬-tantra , , , ,       materialism , 
L®kula P®˜upata , ,                  Mauss, M. 
language , –, , , , , ,     m®y® , , , , , ,
    , ,                              
law                                      Mayamata 
Leder, D.                                Mayer, R. 
legislation                              meat , , , , , 
liberation , , , , , , , ,   medicine 
    , , , , , , , , ,    meditation , , , 
    , , , , , , , ,      Merleau-Ponty, M. , 
                                       Index                                

metaphor , , , , , , ,       palace , 
    , , , ,                   Palas 
M¬m®m. s®/M¬m®m. sakas , , ,        Pallavas 
    , , , ,                    P®ñcar®tra , , , –, , ,
misogyny                                     , , –, , , , ,
modernity , , , , , , ,           
    ,                               Pañcatantra 
    post-                                P®n. ini 
mok◊a, see liberation                     Par®, Par®par®, Apar® , , 
Monier-Williams, M.                      Parama-sam. hit® 
monism , ,                         Parame˜vara 
Mr. gendr®gama/Mr. gendra-tantra ,      Parame˜var®gama 
    , , , ,                Par®tr¬˜ik®-tantra , , , 
Mr. tyunjit/Mr. tyunjaya ,          pa˜u , 
mudr® , –, ,                 P®˜upatas , , , 
Muslims                                  Pau◊kara-sam. hit® 
                                          perception , 
n®da –,                             performance , 
na¥¬ ,                              phenomenology 
N®gas                                   philology 
N®landa                                 philosophy , , , , 
N®rada , , ,                    pleasure , , , , –
N®r®yan. a , , , , , ,    politics , , 
    , ,                          Pollock, S. , , 
narrative , , ,                   pollution , , , , , ,
Nepal , , , ,                       
Netra-tantra , , , , , ,     possession , , –, , 
    , , ,                     power , , , , , , , , ,
New Age                                    , , , , , , , , ,
New Testament                               , , , , , , , , ,
Newars                                      , , , –, , ,
Nietzsche, F. ,                           , , , 
n¬lambara ,                               body of 
nirv®n. a-d¬k◊® , ,                  magical/supernatural , , 
non-Saiddh®ntika traditions , ,       Praj®pati 
    , , , –                    prakr. ti , , , 
Nr. simh®                              pralaya 
ny®sa , –, , , ,         Pralayakevala , 
    ,                               pra˜asti 
Ny®ya ,                               pratinidhi , 
Ny®yamañjari ,                        Pratyabhijñ® , , , , , 
                                          Prapañcas®ra 
Oberhammer, G. ,                     pr®ya˜citta , 
Orissa                                  property rights , 
Otto, R.                                prototype theory 
                                          p‚j® , 
Paddhatis ,                           Pur®n. as , , , 
Padoux, A. , , , , , ,      purity , , , , 
                                       puru◊a , –
Pal, P.                                puru◊®rthas , , 
                            The Tantric Body

Raheja, G.                                ˆakti , , , , , , , ,
r®ja-dharma                                    , , , , , , ,
Rajneesh, Baghavan Shree                        , , , , 
Rajputs                                        M®y® , 
R®makan. ﬂha , , , ,            ˜aktip®ta , 
R®m®nuja , ,                         Saktism 
Rastelli, M. ,                        samaya-d¬k◊® , 
R®◊ﬂrak‚ﬂas                               S®m. khya , , , , , –,
rationality ,                                , , , , 
Raur®v®gama , , , , ,           sam. sk®ras
                                              construction of self 
readers, community of , ,                  rites of passage , 
reading , , , , , –           Samuel,
                                                .
                                                       G. , 
reiﬁcation                                 ˆan. kara 
reincarnation ,                         ˆankaravarman 
religion , , , , , , ,        Sanderson, A. , , , , , ,
     ,                                      , , , , , , , ,
religious studies , ,                      
renouncer ,                             Sanskrit , , 
renunciation –,                            cosmopolis 
repetition, non-identical                      drama 
representation , ,                           poetry 
revelation , , , , , , ,       Sanskritisation 
     , , , , ,                ˆ®rad®tilaka 
     tantric , , –,               S®rdhatri˜atik®lottara-tantra , ,
     vedic , ,                             
R. g-veda                                 S®ttvata-sam. hit® 
rites of passage                          Sauras 
ritual , , , , , , , , ,      Schilder, P. 
     , , , , , , , , ,   Schleiermacher, F. 
     , , , , –, ,       Schrader, O. 
     –, ,                        scripture , , , , , , ,
     sexualised ,                           , , 
Roberts, R.                                    power of 
                                            secrecy 
sacriﬁce , , ,                      self , , , , , , , , ,
Sad®˜iva –, , , , , ,             , , , , , , ,
                                              , , , 
S®dhaka , , , , , ,              deiﬁcation of 
   , ,                                  mapping , 
Sadyoj®ta –                                   supreme 
ˆaiva Siddh®nta , , , , ,         semiotics 
   , , , , , , , , ,      Sergent, B. 
   , , , , , , –,        sex , , , , 
   , , , , ,                   sexual experience/pleasure , ,
ˆaivas , , , , , , , ,               , , , , 
                                              sexual imagery 
ˆaivism , , , , , ,                  sexual substances/ﬂuids , ,
                                                  , , , , 
Sakala ,                                   sexual union , 
                                      Index                                  

     sexualised ritual , , ,         , , , , , , , 
         ,                              absolute/supreme –, ,
sexuality , , , , , , ,           
                                        Sun 
Shamanism                                Svacchandabhairava 
Shulman, D.                              Svacchandabhairava-tantra , , 
Siddha                                  symbolic order/system , , ,
Siddhasiddh®nta-paddhati                   , , 
Siddhayoge˜var¬mata 
sign/s ,                             taboo breaking 
     system of                           Taleju 
Silburn, L. ,                        Tamilnadu , , 
ˆilpaprak®˜a , ,                     Tantra/Tantrism , –, , , ,
Silverstein, M. ,                         , , , , , , , ,
ˆ¬tal®                                       , , , 
ˆiva , , , , , , , , ,     Tantras , , , , , , , ,
     , , , , , , , , ,       , , –, , , –, ,
     , , , , , , , ,       –, , , , , , ,
     , , , , , , ,        , , 
     , , , , , , ,        Bhairava , 
     , , , , , , ,        Buddhist , , , 
     , , , ,                    descent of 
     sport of                               Hindu , 
ˆiva-s‚tras                                 Jain 
˜ivatulya/˜ivasam®ya                        P®ñcar®tra , –
six paths (◊a¥adhvan) –, –            ˆaiva , , –, 
Sm®rtas , ,                              ˆ®kta/Kaula –, 
smr. ti , ,                              Sun 
social order –, ,                       temple 
society , , , , , , ,     tantra-prakriy® 
     as body                             Tantr®loka , , , , , ,
caste                                        , , 
     feudal                              Tantrasadbh®va-tantra 
sociology                                Tantrasamuccaya 
     of knowledge                        Tantras®ra , 
Soma˜ambhu –, , , ,          Tantras®ra-sam. graha , , 
     ,                               Tantrav®rttika 
Soma˜ambhu-paddhati , , ,         t®ntrika , , , , , , 
     , , , , ,           Tatpuru◊a –, 
Somnath                                  tattva , , , –, , ,
sound, divine                                , 
sovereignty                              Tattvaprak®˜a , .
speech, divine , –                   temple/s , , , , , , ,
ˆrautas                                       –, , , , , , 
ˆr¬ Vai◊n. avas ,                          Yogin¬ 
ˆr¬ Vidy® , ,                      temple cities 
˜ruti                                     text/s , , , , , , , ,
state, the –                                –, , , , , , ,
Stein, B. ,                                –, , , , , , , ,
subjectivity , , , , , , ,        , , , , , , ,
                           The Tantric Body

    , , , , , , ,      Vajray®na 
    , , , ,                  vajroli-mudr® 
    internalisation of                    V®k®taka empire 
    scale of                              values , , , , , , , , ,
teyyam –                                     , , , 
theology ,                                 realms of , 
    of revelation –                      V®madeva –
    ˆaiva                                 V®madeva-paddhati 
    tantric ,                          V®make˜var¬mata-tantra 
    Vai◊n. ava                            Var®ha , 
Tibet                                    v®san® 
Tofﬂin, G. ,                            V®sudeva , , , 
tradition , , , , , , , , ,   V®tul®gama 
    , , , , , , , , ,     Veda/s , , , , , –, ,
    –, –, , , , , ,         , , , , , , , , ,
    , , , , , , ,          , , , , 
    , , , , , , ,      Ved®nta , , 
    , , , ,                  Vidye˜varas , , 
    remembrance of ,                  Vighne˜a/Gan. e˜a 
    scriptural , , , , , –,    Vijayanagara , 
    vedic , , , , ,             Vijñ®nabhairava-tantra 
transcendence , , ,                Vijñ®nakevala/Vijñ®nakevalin ,
transgression ,                             
transmigration                           violence , , 
Trika , , , , , , ,         virtues 
    , , , , –, ,         vision , –
    , ,                            Vi◊n. u , , , , , , , ,
treasure-system texts                         , , , , , 
Tripurasundar¬ , ,                  Vi◊n. udharmottara-pur®n. a , 
Tsong-ka-pa ,                           visualisation , , , , ,
Tumburu                                      , , , , , –,
Turner, B.                                    , 
                                            Volosinov, V.N. 
Um®                                       vrata , , 
unmada ,                                vy‚has –
universality 
Up®gamas ,                              White, D. , , , , , , ,
Upani◊ads , , , ,                   , , 
up®ya                                    widows 
Urban, G. , , ,                   wine , , , 
Utpaladeva/Utpalavai◊n. ava , ,        wisdom , 
   
utterance –                             Yajñavalkya-smr. ti 
                                            Y®muna –, 
V®c                                      yantra 
vaidika ,                                yoga , , 
Vaikh®nasas                                  haﬂha 
Vaikh®nasa-s‚tras                         Yogin¬s , , 
Vai◊n. avas ,                           Yogin¬hr. daya , 
Vai◊n. avism                              Yoni-tantra 
